[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, video transmissions, cellular phones, fax machines, computer networks.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: In the 27 years since then, it would seem that the threats to reading have multiplied
[Amit Varma]: exponentially.
[Amit Varma]: There is so much competing for our attention, much of it within the endless black mirror
[Amit Varma]: of our smartphones.
[Amit Varma]: Physical printed books, in fact, were under threat from e-books, which were supposed to
[Amit Varma]: have made paperbacks and hardcovers entirely redundant.
[Amit Varma]: And yes, there are some signs that the world of books and reading has changed massively,
[Amit Varma]: such as the disappearance of bookstores in most of our cities, a matter I cannot stop
[Amit Varma]: lamenting.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, it seems that the publishing business worldwide is in pretty good health.
[Amit Varma]: Latest figures showed that printed book sales in the USA have increased year on year for
[Amit Varma]: the last four years.
[Amit Varma]: And publishing in India also seems to be doing pretty well.
[Amit Varma]: And I have gotten a small sense of this in the course of the 150 episodes that I have
[Amit Varma]: recorded of The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you would have thought that podcasts also would threaten the act of reading, but
[Amit Varma]: over the three years of recording the show, I found that there's a hunger for knowledge
[Amit Varma]: and intelligent discourse out there that is leading people not just to the two hour plus
[Amit Varma]: conversations on this podcast, but also to read more and more books.
[Amit Varma]: I constantly get messages from listeners about how they are reading more because of the books
[Amit Varma]: I discuss on the show.
[Amit Varma]: And that is a matter worth exploring.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is VK Karthikeya, and I hope she won't mind it if I call her one of the
[Amit Varma]: giants of Indian publishing.
[Amit Varma]: She began at Penguin in 1996, left to take charge at HarperCollins a decade later, which
[Amit Varma]: she ran for yet another decade.
[Amit Varma]: And she is now a publisher at Westland.
[Amit Varma]: In this time, she's been a player in the evolution of India's publishing industry, and has watched
[Amit Varma]: not just our reading habits change, but also our society.
[Amit Varma]: I've been trying to put this conversation together for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India, and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art, like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's I-V-M for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Karthika, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get down to the business of books, tell me a little bit about how you happen
[Amit Varma]: to come into publishing to begin with, because it's not like a conventional career choice
[Amit Varma]: that one really has.
[Amit Varma]: So how did that happen?
[Guest]: I think like with most people, it happened entirely by accident.
[Guest]: I was looking for something to do, you know, how in the what I'm talking about, the late
[Guest]: 80s, early 90s, when I was in university, I was in the University of Hyderabad doing
[Guest]: an MA and MPhil.
[Guest]: Then I came to JNU to do a PhD.
[Amit Varma]: This was all in quest of what to do next.
[Amit Varma]: So you're an early anti-national.
[Guest]: I am a total anti-national, past, present, future.
[Guest]: And being in JNU was like a brilliant experience, but it showed me nothing of what I could do
[Guest]: for myself to make a living or to find a vocation or any such thing, because there really wasn't
[Guest]: very much out there for a literature postgraduate who did not want to teach.
[Guest]: I did try teaching for a semester.
[Guest]: They make you do that when you get a fellowship.
[Guest]: They say go earn your keep.
[Guest]: So you have to do that.
[Guest]: And I loved it.
[Guest]: But I also did not like the idea of going back to that same space semester after semester.
[Guest]: I thought it wasn't for me.
[Guest]: I have great respect for people who can do that and keep their energy alive and reinvent
[Guest]: themselves every term.
[Guest]: But I didn't think it was for me.
[Guest]: So it was like, you know, am I a journalist?
[Guest]: Am I going to be?
[Guest]: What am I going to be?
[Guest]: There was very little television.
[Guest]: My fellow JNUites were just beginning to get into that early television stage.
[Guest]: So Ashutosh, for instance, was in the hostel next door and he was seeing this friend of
[Guest]: mine whom he eventually married.
[Guest]: And everyone was talking about this new Ajtak that was coming up.
[Guest]: It was really new.
[Guest]: Everything was fresh and unknown.
[Guest]: But I couldn't see myself in that either.
[Guest]: So a friend of mine went and did a copyedit test at Penguin.
[Guest]: And he said, I didn't get it.
[Guest]: But you know, you know the language well enough to maybe get in.
[Guest]: And I thought, hey, that's a luck.
[Guest]: I have to show him I'm better than him maybe.
[Guest]: And I'll go do this thing.
[Guest]: And I went off to this office in Nehru Place.
[Guest]: I wasn't a Delhi.
[Guest]: I'm not a Delhi person.
[Guest]: I'm like never lived there before I came to JNU.
[Guest]: So anyway, I went looking for it.
[Guest]: I went and did a test.
[Guest]: And then they called me back for an interview.
[Guest]: And David Davidar was the publisher then.
[Guest]: So he did an interview as well.
[Guest]: And they said, come and join.
[Guest]: And I had this little wager with myself.
[Guest]: I said, if the money they give me is more than what I'm getting as my UGC fellowship,
[Guest]: then I'll take it.
[Guest]: Otherwise, obviously not.
[Guest]: What's the point?
[Guest]: I don't even know what this job is about.
[Guest]: They offered me 500 rupees more.
[Guest]: And I said, oh, that's not bad.
[Guest]: Let me go and do this.
[Guest]: So I went to check it out.
[Guest]: And that first week was amazing because it was like falling into the right place without
[Guest]: any idea that there was even such a place out there.
[Guest]: And by Friday evening, I remember vividly thinking to myself, this is it.
[Guest]: I just want to do this for the rest of my life.
[Guest]: And I was darn lucky that that happened.
[Guest]: So that's how I fell into publishing and never left.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess one reason why publishing would have seemed such a fit for you was because
[Amit Varma]: I presume you were already someone who loved books.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: Like, how did you start reading?
[Amit Varma]: What were the circumstances which allowed you to sort of become an avid reader?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of books did you read?
[Amit Varma]: Who were the authors you enjoyed reading at that time?
[Guest]: I guess it was my mother.
[Guest]: You know, in Kerala, when you're growing up, there's a lot of reading that happens outside
[Guest]: of comfort zones.
[Guest]: I mean, people read in Malayalam, but they also read in English.
[Guest]: And I remember my mother had these books, she used to go to the H wheeler stand at the
[Guest]: railway station, because that was where their books were.
[Guest]: Either you had them in the library, like in the village library or the town library or
[Guest]: whatever.
[Guest]: If you lived in a city, then you had a bigger one.
[Guest]: But you had a lot of libraries in Kerala.
[Guest]: And then you had the H wheeler guys.
[Guest]: And mom would go to the station and buy those H wheeler stamp two rupee paperbacks to her
[Guest]: two rupees 50 paisa paperbacks.
[Guest]: I still remember seeing those and they're still at home.
[Guest]: But they would be random books like there would be Maxim Gorky, a lot of Maxim Gorky
[Guest]: for some reason, there was the usual Agatha Christie and things like that that came up
[Guest]: later.
[Guest]: There was a lot of Russian stuff because you remember there were Russian books that were
[Guest]: very popular in India at that time and very cheap.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of reading of literature that came, strangely enough, a lot of it in
[Guest]: translation into English, but read by us as though it was always just English.
[Guest]: And I think I grew up with that cupboard of books, which was my mother's and just read
[Guest]: everything that was in it.
[Guest]: I also remember reading my first Harold Robbins, which my mother quickly grabbed from me and
[Guest]: said never again, do not read these books.
[Guest]: I was like, if you can read them, why can't I read them?
[Guest]: But those were like really innocent days where you just read what you got and you were satisfied
[Guest]: with that or you went into the library seeking what you could.
[Guest]: So from there, I also remember that my school in Hyderabad had a large library, which for
[Guest]: some reason, apart from the Russian, the mother, the Quiet Flows the Dawn, like we devoured
[Guest]: those.
[Guest]: I cannot imagine a child in school now reading 500 pages of Quiet Flows the Dawn.
[Guest]: There's no reason to, right?
[Guest]: But we had no choice, what was there we read.
[Guest]: And I remember discovering Louis L'Amour.
[Guest]: It was fantastic.
[Guest]: I mean, there was this rock star cowboy on a horse going out and conquering the frontiers.
[Guest]: And the strange thing is, when you look back, how little one understood the politics of
[Guest]: it, right?
[Guest]: You read Louis L'Amour and you thought this guy was a hero, this white man on a horse
[Guest]: was just like doing all the right things.
[Guest]: And those so-called red Indians were the guys who, well, it's okay for them to go because
[Guest]: they were primitive.
[Guest]: And it's so much later that wisdom dawns and you understand what you were absorbing without
[Guest]: any sense of the world outside of your own little, you know, home and school and library.
[Guest]: But I think what it did was, it just gave all of us in my generation who are lucky enough
[Guest]: to have those libraries, reading across the world, roaming the world in these ways without
[Guest]: any baggage.
[Guest]: Nobody told us what was right.
[Guest]: Nobody told us what was wrong.
[Guest]: We had no theory backing us or supporting us.
[Guest]: So we just took what we could and we made what we could of it.
[Guest]: I'm really grateful I have that.
[Guest]: Now when I tell my kids, why aren't you reading this or that or the other, and they have very
[Guest]: solid reasons for why they should do because they have all that armory around them.
[Guest]: We had nothing.
[Guest]: So I guess we were one of the first generations of people who read in English in that way
[Guest]: world literature available to us.
[Guest]: So that's where it began, I guess, my reading.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I'm just thinking about like, I'm also an 80s kid as partly you are, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: And I had JP Narayan, the politician on the show before this, and he was speaking about
[Amit Varma]: growing up in a village in the 60s and then sort of studying in Hyderabad again, like
[Amit Varma]: you did in the 70s.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that sort of struck me was how a lot of us as individuals and
[Amit Varma]: therefore how society in large is also shaped by the influences we have available to us.
[Amit Varma]: For example, today, any kid today, your kids, for example, have all the knowledge of the
[Amit Varma]: world available to them.
[Amit Varma]: In our times, we didn't really have that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you have your typical cultural influences, you have that one TV station,
[Amit Varma]: which is Doordarshan and you have your All India Radio and for those who are lucky enough
[Amit Varma]: to listen to BBC, and then you have books.
[Amit Varma]: And even within that world of books, it strikes me that from what I remember is that there
[Amit Varma]: would be a very cliched sort of set of books, which would be standard to the growing up.
[Amit Varma]: Like I'm sure both you and I grew up reading say, Ennett Blyton, of course, you know, Hardy
[Unknown]: Boys and you know, Tintin and Asterix would have been a treat for us.
[Amit Varma]: And how therefore, you know, that becomes almost by happenstance, because there's no
[Amit Varma]: particular reason only those books are available and not so much else.
[Amit Varma]: But almost by happenstance, that almost becomes a sort of the bedrock of our thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And it's all kind of...
[Guest]: Yeah, in my case, it was I realized also that my father was an educationist, he was the
[Guest]: principal of a school.
[Guest]: And so when I started the first time he actually came and gave me a book to read, which was
[Guest]: kind of chosen was Ennett Blyton, because I had chicken pox, I was lying in bed and
[Guest]: I couldn't do anything and he gave me the famous five.
[Guest]: And I just never wanted to get out of bed after that, because every day I wanted another
[Guest]: and another and another.
[Guest]: And that kind of discovery of the word that because you're talking about television and
[Guest]: radio, we had like no television at all in those days.
[Guest]: What we did have was radio and mostly for Vinaka Geetamala, and then the cricket commentary.
[Guest]: So we'd be like glued to the transistor listening to the whatever match was going on anywhere
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: And that was really our only exposure to anything.
[Guest]: Books were all that were there to show us the world.
[Guest]: So we were lucky, because if we'd had anything else, I doubt we would have had that same
[Guest]: kind of passion for books as we were able to have because of this.
[Amit Varma]: And given the centrality of books in one's imaginative life for people who were fortunate
[Amit Varma]: enough to sort of be able to access books.
[Amit Varma]: That brings me to my next question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, the rise of Penguin in the 90s and David David of course, is an iconic
[Amit Varma]: figure for many people.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about what Indian publishing was pre that period pre Penguin
[Amit Varma]: coming in?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how did it function?
[Amit Varma]: Where did who were the publishers who operated?
[Guest]: Where did they get books from?
[Guest]: I think the most of the publishers were very much Indian in that sense.
[Guest]: I mean, certainly Penguin was a big multinational to come in.
[Guest]: There was OUP.
[Guest]: There was education publishing, but in trade publishing, there were players like J. Coe
[Guest]: and Vickers.
[Guest]: And they did publish books and there were a lot of first time publishing that they did,
[Guest]: which then introduced writers who got picked up by other big publishers later.
[Guest]: But it was still quite small.
[Guest]: I mean, you had your Malgudi days, and you had bestsellers like that, which were very
[Guest]: much part of the reading circuit.
[Guest]: By the time Neeraj Choudhury had been published, Raja Rao was being published, there was enough
[Guest]: substantial publishing, but English was still the language that was beginning to be lingua
[Guest]: franca in there were more books being published in the languages than there were in English.
[Guest]: And this is also the time around the time that Penguin comes in, for instance, something
[Guest]: very beautiful and in the parallel space is happening, which is Kali for Women is coming
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: And that is a completely different sort of the independent press is being set up with
[Guest]: an agenda.
[Guest]: And that press obviously is still around in different way now.
[Guest]: So while Penguin flourished and decided to follow the Western model, Penguin was modelled
[Guest]: very much on the way, say, Penguin UK would have run or Penguin US would have run.
[Guest]: And all that we see now of the way publishing works in terms of how books are acquired,
[Guest]: how they are marketed and sold, a lot of it owes itself to that time when things were
[Guest]: set in place.
[Guest]: Now, that could have been done very differently.
[Guest]: We might have evolved a different way of working if we had looked at the way the independent
[Guest]: presses were functioning.
[Guest]: But these two things came alongside and they both followed completely different trajectories.
[Guest]: But I think that late 80s is what set the pace.
[Guest]: And it was very, very small.
[Guest]: I remember in the early days in Penguin, we were doing something like 40 books a year.
[Guest]: Then it went up to 50, then went up to 60.
[Guest]: And that was still a lot of books to try and acquire because of a few people writing.
[Guest]: There was a lot more work required to get them to be publishable.
[Guest]: And there were no computers in the early days.
[Guest]: There was no PDFs to edit with.
[Guest]: There was all hard copy.
[Guest]: So you would take printouts and then you would mark edits on them.
[Guest]: And then the typesetter would put in the corrections.
[Guest]: And I still remember the really interesting way in which covers happened.
[Guest]: So Penguin in those days was an Anand Bazar Patrika joint venture with Penguin UK.
[Guest]: So the art department was the Anand Bazar art department sitting in Calcutta.
[Guest]: And so a cover would be ideated here, like, you know, this is the book, this is the title,
[Guest]: this is the... and it would be sent to Calcutta.
[Guest]: And there would be someone sitting at a desk there who would draw out a cover, and then
[Guest]: courier it back to Delhi.
[Guest]: And then David would look at it and then do more scrawls and scratches on that.
[Guest]: And then it would be couriered back to Calcutta.
[Guest]: And this is how...
[Guest]: I mean, it sounds completely weird now that things could actually function in that way
[Guest]: and be successfully done, but they were done.
[Guest]: And gradually as computers and emails and all of that happened in the mid 90s, then
[Guest]: things began to professionalize in a very different way.
[Guest]: But all along, I mean, as I said, the family owned businesses that were already in India
[Guest]: and were publishing in English, they were going full tilt at it.
[Guest]: And they were acquiring books, they were editing and publishing.
[Guest]: Marketing was not so much on the horizon then the way it is.
[Guest]: But a lot of people were invested in distribution, and in bringing books from international markets
[Guest]: in the UK and the US and selling them here.
[Guest]: So it was all very early days, but you can see the foundation of everything we do here
[Guest]: and trace it back to that time, late 80s, mid 80s, maybe is a better time.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, what you just said about the technology that we take for granted brings
[Amit Varma]: to mind is something I was just reading yesterday about an author from a few decades ago complaining
[Amit Varma]: about how you worked for many years on a book and then lost his only manuscript.
[Guest]: Oh, God.
[Amit Varma]: And a young person today may wonder how can there be an only manuscript?
[Unknown]: Isn't it on the cloud?
[Amit Varma]: What are you talking about?
[Amit Varma]: And it's reflective of the things like another observation a friend of mine had made was
[Amit Varma]: that the generation that is growing up today will never know what it is like to be lost
[Amit Varma]: because of GPS and all that.
[Guest]: They never actually that sense of physically not knowing where you are, won't exist, which
[Guest]: is almost making up for it by being thoroughly lost in the head half the time.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure that's intended for your kids.
[Amit Varma]: If they are listening.
[Amit Varma]: So back then in the late 80s, early 90s, what's the scope of Indian publishing at that point?
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, how many books sell?
[Amit Varma]: What is considered a bestseller per se?
[Amit Varma]: Is it possible to make a living from writing or is it a thing of passion?
[Guest]: So when I joined, it was 96 year end, I think.
[Guest]: And the books that we were publishing then were printed like 1000 copies, 2000 copies,
[Guest]: 1500.
[Guest]: I don't think we ever went over 2000 copies.
[Guest]: And if we sold 1000 copies, we were quite happy.
[Guest]: And a lot of books were printed at 1000 copies.
[Guest]: I think offset printing required that you did them in certain lots.
[Guest]: So academic publishing then and even now often does 500 copies of a book.
[Guest]: But Penguin was like trying to reach a larger audience.
[Guest]: It had more commercial ambitions.
[Guest]: So 1000 and 2000 was considered to be the goal.
[Guest]: I think that was roughly how it played out until Arundhati Roy happened.
[Guest]: And then it was like the sky was just the limit.
[Guest]: And suddenly you realized that what you thought of as possibly always going to be a small
[Guest]: limited world could conquer the world.
[Guest]: And then the numbers and the print runs, they suddenly became in tens of thousands.
[Guest]: Of course, even then for a very few titles, but the possibility was there finally.
[Guest]: And so the irony is that your average book even now is 3000 copies.
[Guest]: So it looks like for 20 years down, we are still looking at almost the same number of
[Guest]: serious readers in the market who will discover a new book and follow it up and read with
[Guest]: intent.
[Guest]: Whereas you have the commercial novels, as they call them, the books that are trending,
[Amit Varma]: being picked up in lakhs.
[Amit Varma]: Would it be fair to say that the long tail is basically the same size?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, at the bestseller end that has expanded massively.
[Guest]: Truly.
[Guest]: That bestseller end has moved in directions we hadn't anticipated at all in those days.
[Guest]: I think in those times, it was still the literary novel that seemed to be the only future and
[Guest]: the only kind of star that everybody wanted to reach for.
[Guest]: It was a complete surprise to people in publishing that actually what people want to read is
[Guest]: not necessarily the literary novel, which is a formal constructed novel of the West,
[Guest]: but they want something completely different and individualized for home.
[Guest]: And till that happened, I think we were just like walking in one direction.
[Guest]: And then suddenly it splintered and different possibilities emerged.
[Guest]: Differentiation on the bookshelf emerged, different categories of publishing emerged.
[Guest]: So while everybody was focused on like one kind of thing, either the big narrative nonfiction,
[Guest]: which is the biography of a big figure or like big politics or something apart from
[Guest]: the literary novel, then it suddenly became about commercial novels, about thrillers,
[Guest]: about romance, about spirituality, well being, you know, Mars and Venus kind of books that
[Guest]: suddenly became the big bestsellers.
[Guest]: So that differentiation, I think, was a sign of maturing of the market and the maturing
[Guest]: of the reader in some way that they had the confidence to choose to read something rather
[Guest]: than just go with what was given to them and almost like a benediction.
[Guest]: This is good for you.
[Guest]: These are the books you should read.
[Guest]: Suddenly became a panic in publishing houses where they said, what happened to the author?
[Guest]: When did the reader become center stage?
[Guest]: And suddenly when the reader's center stage, then you've got to realign your thinking about
[Guest]: what you want, what the market wants.
[Guest]: And you started thinking about the market as a living, breathing thing only then.
[Guest]: All this seems really archaic when you look back, because everything now is geared to
[Guest]: the market.
[Guest]: Everything is geared to the consumer.
[Guest]: We didn't use words like consumer then, right?
[Guest]: We just knew that the person who produces the content is the important person.
[Guest]: That the consumer could be equally important was not on the horizon.
[Guest]: And now the place where I work at, well, consumer is the word.
[Guest]: It's always about the consumer.
[Guest]: It's about saying, do you know your reader?
[Guest]: How are you giving your reader what they want?
[Guest]: Stop being the person who decides what the reader wants.
[Guest]: So it's a dramatic shift in perception, in the way you work, in the way writing itself
[Guest]: is happening.
[Guest]: Everything is on its head as far as if you looked at it from that point of view.
[Guest]: But it's very straight up for someone who's been born in this time.
[Amit Varma]: No, you know, and for a lot of people focusing on the consumer would almost be infradig.
[Amit Varma]: It's like, you know, what do they know, and you know, we will be the gatekeepers and the
[Amit Varma]: avatars of good taste.
[Amit Varma]: My other question is sort of related to this that when you get into publishing, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to the heuristics of how do you choose a book or what kind of books you
[Amit Varma]: look for, I guess your first basic heuristic is obviously your own taste, what you like
[Unknown]: and what you don't like.
[Amit Varma]: But then you have to go beyond this very fast when you start thinking of the market.
[Amit Varma]: And that's especially so in a marketplace that expands as rapidly like shortly after
[Guest]: you come on the scene, then Arundhati's book happens and Chetan Bhagat happens in the early
[Guest]: 2000s.
[Amit Varma]: And people are just reading different kinds of things.
[Amit Varma]: What is this process like?
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing that I often speak about to fellow editors, which is in journalism, of
[Amit Varma]: course, not publishing, but to fellow editors and to people who commission podcasts and
[Amit Varma]: whatever people who are in that editorial filtering decision making process, is that
[Amit Varma]: the most important quality you must have is humility.
[Amit Varma]: And assume that your own tastes are necessarily determine what is good or what is bad or what
[Amit Varma]: people want or what people don't want.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people are very diverse, they want all kinds of things.
[Amit Varma]: So you've got to sort of have the humility to step back from your own preferences and
[Amit Varma]: biases and be sort of open to that.
[Amit Varma]: How was that process for you of developing your vision as an editor?
[Guest]: I think publishing is the most paradoxical space in many ways.
[Guest]: It's like different forces pulling against each other in almost everything you do.
[Guest]: And part of that, I think, is this thing of choosing what you want to publish.
[Guest]: On the one hand, yes, what you want to read is what you want to publish.
[Guest]: And I would never underestimate that, because in many ways, the reader and the editor are,
[Guest]: especially if you speak about it in situations of say class and location of geography, etc.
[Guest]: In a certain way, you'll find that there are very similar people.
[Guest]: And maybe what you think is a strong book would resonate with those many people for
[Guest]: sure.
[Guest]: So the trick, I think, is to decide the identity of that reader and to say, OK, this is one
[Guest]: book that I think is wonderful.
[Guest]: And I'm sure there are like a few thousand people out there who read it.
[Guest]: But there might be another book which I may not read or pick up for myself.
[Guest]: But maybe there are 100,000 readers out there who will read that.
[Guest]: What we would try and do is to find a reader in-house whose taste might resonate with those
[Guest]: 100,000 people as well.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think diversity within a publishing house is the one big thing, because
[Guest]: you cannot have it as one taste across all editors, all bringing in the same kind of
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: So as long as there are different minds at work and different tastes at work, we will
[Guest]: always be able to reach different kinds of readers.
[Guest]: And the humility you speak of, I think part of that humility is to say, you may be the
[Guest]: publisher, you may be one of the senior people, none of that matters.
[Guest]: If there's someone who's on her in her first month in publishing, who falls in love with
[Guest]: the book, one has to also listen to that and say, OK, we don't know this.
[Guest]: But clearly, if this person loves it, then there must be something to it.
[Guest]: And we need to follow that instinct as well.
[Guest]: So not being set in one way or deciding for everyone.
[Guest]: I think that's the first step that all of us learn in that journey of how to and what
[Amit Varma]: to publish.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the most like I came across this awesome study a few years ago when I
[Amit Varma]: read Philip Tetlock's book, Super Forecasting, where he talks about how the most important
[Amit Varma]: factor for good decision making in any company is not intelligence or education or any of
[Amit Varma]: those things you might normally assume, but diversity.
[Amit Varma]: That's the most important sort of determinant.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it is in every company's self interest to sort of enhance the diversity
[Guest]: of the workplace, not for its own sake, but just in terms of business, it makes business
[Guest]: sense.
[Amit Varma]: You have and what you said, obviously speaks to that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, one criticism a lot of people do have of publishing even today is that it's
[Amit Varma]: not diverse enough that you find.
[Amit Varma]: I agree, it's kind of homogenous.
[Guest]: I agree entirely.
[Guest]: It's partly the language we work with the sophisticated narrative, which is what we
[Guest]: expect to publish when we hire editors, as though you're hiring them at the level of
[Guest]: literary fiction editors, when actually you might want people who are editing Sri Sri
[Guest]: Ravi Shankar, or, you know, something like that.
[Guest]: So now I think all of us are learning that that differentiation is very, very important.
[Guest]: And you have to have people who think differently, and who read differently, and who use language
[Guest]: differently.
[Guest]: There's no point in I often think there's that there's no point in my going out to try
[Guest]: and commission a book that a 17 year old might, you know, completely take to if I'm really
[Guest]: skilled at my job.
[Guest]: And if I've really read enough, and I'm able to put myself into the heads of all kinds
[Guest]: of people, I just might be able to.
[Guest]: But I think that's really difficult.
[Guest]: I think you need to have specialists in every category.
[Guest]: You need to have people who develop not only their instinct for that category, but also
[Guest]: experience in that category, who can deepen their understanding of the subject while casting
[Guest]: around to see what is the broadest base of readership and commission to that there's
[Guest]: a lot more science.
[Guest]: I mean, I always used to think publishing was all about art.
[Guest]: You know, it was like the final thing to do, getting the politics, the nuance, the writing,
[Guest]: that's all there still, I don't think it's devoid of that.
[Guest]: But I think that art without the science, the art without the algorithm in today's world
[Guest]: is not going to be effective.
[Amit Varma]: No, and while I entirely sort of agree with the shift towards keeping the consumer at
[Amit Varma]: the centre, which I would say is essentially an overdue respect for readers and what they
[Amit Varma]: want, are there values that go beyond that?
[Amit Varma]: For example, if I may use an analogy, it just strikes me thinking aloud that the editor
[Amit Varma]: of a publishing house is somewhat like a zookeeper and you're running a zoo and you've got all
[Amit Varma]: kinds of animals.
[Amit Varma]: But after a period of time, you realise that everyone wants to see the lion and the elephant
[Amit Varma]: and the hyena and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And there are certain exotic or even mundane species, perhaps which nobody wants to see.
[Amit Varma]: So they don't, you know, they're just taking a valuable real estate, they're not worth
[Amit Varma]: the money.
[Amit Varma]: And then the zookeeper has a choice that you know, does he keep them there?
[Amit Varma]: Or does he remove them?
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, are they sort of a higher set of values where you say that, okay, for example,
[Amit Varma]: poetry may not sell, but I will nevertheless subsidise my poetry imprint with, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the revenues I get from selling bestsellers elsewhere, because it is important for us
[Amit Varma]: to do as publishers.
[Amit Varma]: And this, in a sense, is a larger question that also correlates with a similar question
[Amit Varma]: you could ask about journalism that are you going to be entirely market driven, or are
[Amit Varma]: there some kind of higher values?
[Amit Varma]: And to follow up on that, if there are higher values that go beyond the logic of the market,
[Amit Varma]: are they inherent in the logic of the profession that is either journalism or publishing in
[Amit Varma]: your case, or will they necessarily come from the individuals who happen to be there?
[Guest]: So many things to think about here.
[Guest]: I don't know if anything is beyond the logic of the market, because what you're seeing,
[Guest]: the fewer numbers, the failure, perhaps of some things is also the logic of the market
[Guest]: that's driving it to non existence.
[Guest]: And I think there is a call to be taken, for instance, literary fiction, more than poetry
[Guest]: in some ways.
[Guest]: Literary fiction is always going to be a difficult thing to publish, I think, because it is premised
[Guest]: on the assumption that there are readers out there who are willing to invest a certain
[Guest]: kind of time and intelligence, and also effort in reading, right?
[Guest]: And who feel that there is a value attached to that work, which they are willing to explore
[Guest]: and imbibe.
[Guest]: And as long as that continues to be a difficult space, there will always be the temptation
[Guest]: to say, why do it, you know, you can do five books in that space, it requires less effort,
[Guest]: and you will still make much more money.
[Guest]: But I think that is non negotiable, as far as I'm concerned.
[Guest]: Part of why publishing continues to be important is because it produces ideas, it produces
[Guest]: a way forward for thinking about language, about construction of thought of society of
[Guest]: the way we live and the way we dream.
[Guest]: These are not things that you can put away at any cost.
[Guest]: They need to be there, they need to be supported, they need to be put out in the world for people
[Guest]: to receive or not receive.
[Guest]: And the interesting thing about publishing in India is that your stakes are not that
[Guest]: high in individual books in terms of your investment, either, you're not going to go
[Guest]: under, because you backed one literary novel, it would go under if your entire list was
[Guest]: literary fiction, and they weren't all of the kind of I mean, like one of the acquisitions,
[Guest]: of course, that too much is getting published, right?
[Guest]: So that I would agree with that there's no point in putting on books that perhaps somebody
[Guest]: else could do, or maybe they could just go out into that whole self published space.
[Guest]: Maybe you don't need a mainstream publisher for that.
[Guest]: But otherwise, being selective, putting out the best of writing that is available to you.
[Guest]: That is, I hesitate to use the word duty, because it isn't like the right word in a
[Guest]: place where we talk about markets and consumerism.
[Guest]: But I think publishing is still old world enough to nurture that sense of duty and responsibility
[Guest]: and to say, what are you as a publisher, if your job is merely to make money, then I don't
[Guest]: think publishing supports that worldview yet.
[Guest]: There are publishers and there are spaces within publishing that do but from where I'm
[Guest]: sitting, I'm seeing it as a job that has a responsibility of putting books into the world
[Guest]: that aid a conversation that aid discourse that aid intelligent thinking about the way
[Guest]: we live.
[Guest]: And it could be nonfiction, it could be fiction, it could be poetry, any of these things, the
[Guest]: challenge and the other side of that duty and responsibility is to make sure that my
[Guest]: company doesn't suffer for that, that the way I publish these books, the way I bring
[Guest]: in the right books, the way we package them, the way we sell and market and tell the world
[Guest]: why they need to be read, that needs to be done in such a way that you will find the
[Guest]: readers for them, and that they will go on to maybe get an award or go on shortlists
[Guest]: or whatever it is that takes to get some more visibility for them, and gives the author
[Guest]: the satisfaction that her words are being read and appreciated in the way they were
[Guest]: meant to be.
[Guest]: So it's a double edged thing, you need to do it, but you also need to do it smartly.
[Guest]: And to make sure that you don't you don't publish a book that then goes nowhere or just
[Guest]: sinks.
[Guest]: That's no good for anyone.
[Guest]: So it's a daily challenge to put the good book out there and get it to sell.
[Guest]: But even if you don't sell it all, even if you just break even, I still think it's something
[Guest]: that we have a responsibility to do.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of the economics of it.
[Amit Varma]: Like when you talk about how the stakes are not too high, and by backing one literary
[Amit Varma]: author, we won't necessarily go broke.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, even if we break even, it's something we're doing, what is sort of break
[Amit Varma]: even like how many copies does a book need to sell for it?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So if I've taken on a novel that I think I would have to sell something like 5000 copies
[Guest]: to earn out, say the advance for the author, and if I end up selling 2500 copies, I will
[Guest]: be writing off a certain amount of money that should be earned out by the advance and is
[Guest]: not being earned out.
[Guest]: But I would have broken even in the sense that overall, I may not have made the usual
[Guest]: 7 to 10% margin, which is all publishing margins are, I may end up with zero, nothing gained,
[Guest]: nothing lost.
[Guest]: But as long as the advance has been reasonable, and premised on that first print run, we're
[Guest]: okay if you sell roughly 60% of that print run.
[Amit Varma]: And do you find other publishers also, you know, share this sort of sense of you didn't
[Amit Varma]: want to use the word duty.
[Amit Varma]: So this sense of duty in a sense, it's not a bad word, towards keeping literature, poetry,
[Amit Varma]: all of these genres sort of alive in some way or the other while one goes about the
[Amit Varma]: business of selling books.
[Guest]: I think a lot of them do the conversations I have with my colleagues and other publishing
[Guest]: houses is often how to do this balancing act, how do we sell books?
[Guest]: But how do we also do books that we really deeply care about and feel should be published?
[Guest]: It's a battle that everyone is fighting, and I know very few people who don't care about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: There are some who've taken the conscious decision that okay, somebody else in house
[Guest]: is doing that part of the job.
[Guest]: My job is to bring in the revenue in a certain way, and I will do that.
[Guest]: But I think even in doing that, they contribute to that larger idea that publishing still
[Guest]: has a job to do that is beyond revenue.
[Guest]: And for as long as we can keep that as center stage, I think we'll all be the beneficiaries
[Guest]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: And how have your sort of own reading taste evolved, you know, over this entire journey?
[Amit Varma]: Because you obviously start off with a set of preferences, but then you have to widen
[Amit Varma]: your reading as a matter of professional duty, you just have to pretty much read everything.
[Guest]: And how does that evolve?
[Guest]: I think I started out by reading everything.
[Guest]: So that was probably the best thing I did for myself as an editor unknowingly.
[Guest]: I never felt a sense of hierarchy in my reading.
[Guest]: Nobody ever told me and I didn't feel that reading Enid Blyton was less than reading
[Guest]: Gorky or whatever.
[Guest]: I didn't know the difference.
[Guest]: But I think a lot of my understanding of publishing and the kinds of books I want to do come from
[Guest]: my years in university, especially Central University in Hyderabad.
[Guest]: We had a fantastic set of teachers who, through literary theory at us, you can imagine someone
[Guest]: coming out of an undergraduate course in a conventional college comes to a university
[Guest]: where the faculty is like, just come back from doing PhDs in literary theory in the
[Guest]: US.
[Guest]: And they come and tell you the author's dead.
[Guest]: And I mean, even that notion that the author's dead actually is like from 10 years ago, you
[Guest]: guys just discovering it now.
[Guest]: We'd never come up with words like feminism in such a way as in that space.
[Guest]: And you suddenly discover that it's not just pleasure that you're reading for, but that
[Guest]: there are processes that go into reading and analyzing that pleasure that allow you to
[Guest]: then understand how to construct a book differently and to make that pleasure possible for someone
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: This seems like something that wasn't intended at all by my teachers.
[Guest]: They thought they were teaching us for, you know, to make educators of us.
[Guest]: But as I got into publishing, and as I started working on books, I think all of these theoretical
[Guest]: understandings and political understandings of the text of trying to struggle with a Derrida
[Guest]: or a Spivak or reading Canadian writers and American and Australian writers and trying
[Guest]: to understand how they use language so differently.
[Guest]: It knocks everything out of you, any learning that you thought was to be taken seriously.
[Guest]: All you know is that it's a blank slate every time you open a book and what you get could
[Guest]: surprise you or could disappoint you.
[Guest]: But every single work is an experience in itself.
[Guest]: And I think if you can open a book, every manuscript that comes to you in that same
[Guest]: way and say, I don't know what to expect from this, but whatever it is, let me read it in
[Guest]: its own terms.
[Guest]: Let me read it as what it sets out to be, not what I would like to read or what I would
[Guest]: like to see.
[Guest]: Then I think you're already better off in your editorial approach.
[Guest]: I mean, you will go to it with a more open mind than if you had standards of excellence
[Guest]: that had to be met in a certain way and only in that way.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is that the reading that I did expanded into reading about writing
[Guest]: and reading about reading.
[Guest]: And there was a lot of poetry in that.
[Guest]: And I had extraordinary teachers.
[Guest]: My supervisor was a Maharashtrian who read Kipling with great enthusiasm and showed me
[Guest]: how to read historical fiction in a certain way.
[Guest]: I did my MPhil on Mary Renaud, this wonderful historical fiction writer who's got this fabulous
[Guest]: series on Alexander.
[Guest]: And so I worked on that.
[Guest]: And now when I edit historical fiction, I'm grateful I had that.
[Guest]: I had Hoshang Merchant as my professor.
[Guest]: He read American poetry to us and talked about gender in a way that was very distant from
[Guest]: Tejaswini Niranjana, who was my introduction to feminist reading, who does a completely
[Guest]: different reading of gender than him.
[Guest]: You know, so when you get thrown into a space like that, where people are coming at you
[Guest]: with ideas that are so different, each of them has a position and each of them fairly
[Guest]: fierce in their positions.
[Guest]: You just can't approach a text either neutrally or objectively, as they say.
[Guest]: You have to fight with it a little bit like you struggle with it.
[Guest]: You dig deeper if you can.
[Guest]: And so as it happens, I think the very first book I commissioned as an editor at Penguin
[Guest]: was a collection of queer writing edited by Hoshang.
[Guest]: And that was an eye opener in itself, the kind of text that came in the way we worked
[Guest]: on it.
[Guest]: And I think one of my dearest memories from that time of surprise in publishing and writers
[Guest]: was God, David had said, yes, go ahead and commission this book.
[Guest]: And Hoshang had given me a list of his like wish list.
[Guest]: And I was adding to that.
[Guest]: And then we were writing off letters to people.
[Guest]: And I remember we were sitting in this little conference room we had where all the commissioning
[Guest]: editors were sitting, there were five of us with David.
[Guest]: And suddenly there was this call, we had landlines only.
[Guest]: And somebody was calling from the reception to say there's someone for me.
[Guest]: And I was like, who is it?
[Guest]: And they said, Vikram Seth.
[Guest]: And I was like, Vikram Seth was talking to me?
[Guest]: And I remember being really nervous and shaky about even taking this call.
[Guest]: And he was calling to say, I got your letter about inclusion in this anthology you're doing.
[Guest]: And I'm very happy to be in it.
[Guest]: I just thought I'd write I'd call and tell you myself.
[Guest]: I was floored, you know, that he thought it was important enough to do this.
[Amit Varma]: I'm floored listening to this.
[Guest]: I mean, I was like this young editor on my first commissioned, you know, book.
[Guest]: So it just, it is an amazing world.
[Guest]: Every day you come up on people who surprise you, who make you think about all the good,
[Guest]: best things in life.
[Guest]: And each time something lets you down, you find two other people or two other situations
[Guest]: that quickly bolster you and say, no, no, no, all is good.
[Guest]: It's better.
[Guest]: And I think that is the best thing about being in publishing these people around you, whose
[Guest]: books you read and work with, sometimes you don't work with ever, but they enrich your
[Guest]: environment.
[Amit Varma]: So you were speaking about, you know, learning how to read, for example, and a few days back,
[Amit Varma]: I reread Harold Bloom's book on learning how to read and why I think it's called and whenever
[Amit Varma]: people for example, tell me that they can't understand poetry, for example, though they
[Amit Varma]: are otherwise readers, I give them a copy of Mary Oliver's poetry handbook, because
[Guest]: that's such a lovely book.
[Guest]: And it really helps you appreciate poetry.
[Guest]: Today somebody posted a tweet, a poem from that the bride and the bridegroom.
[Guest]: What was that?
[Guest]: The bridegroom embracing the world and the bride embracing embrace amazement.
[Amit Varma]: Something like that.
[Guest]: It was beautiful lines.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's again, a heck of a book.
[Amit Varma]: So just asking you about like one, obviously, the nature of how you read a book changes
[Amit Varma]: as you elaborated upon when you are an editor, when you're a publisher changes completely,
[Amit Varma]: you just you know, you find different depths.
[Amit Varma]: But if you had to, for example, advise my listeners, who might be earnest readers, you
[Amit Varma]: know, on the subject of what should they read to enhance the way they read?
[Guest]: What are the recommendations you'd have?
[Guest]: You know, I don't think there are any particular texts that can help you read.
[Guest]: Reading is its own learning.
[Guest]: The more you read the many kinds of texts you read analysis of it would help if you
[Guest]: are in the frame of mind to be receptive to that.
[Guest]: But otherwise, just exploring texts and as many kinds of texts as you can reading poetry
[Guest]: today reading a novel tomorrow reading a graphic novel the day after reading narrative nonfiction.
[Guest]: The good thing about our digital experience now is that you can Google and say what are
[Guest]: the 10 best books in each category.
[Guest]: And it's interesting that there are many cliches in there, but there's usually very, very good
[Guest]: recommendations in there.
[Guest]: So you can find practically any kind of book you're in the mood for.
[Guest]: And I don't think there's any substitute for that reading.
[Guest]: There are few books that can tell you how to read as well as the books themselves can
[Guest]: tell you.
[Guest]: And I also think that poetry is an invaluable guide to how to read because it and to write
[Guest]: because it's almost like a laboratory where you're shaking up the words and reconfiguring
[Guest]: them, throwing in something different, something new, a comma in one place and not the other
[Guest]: can change the way you breathe that line.
[Guest]: And that changes the way you write or read that line.
[Guest]: And things like that only come to you when you as you keep reading, like nobody will
[Guest]: be able to point that out to you in the way that you can point it out to yourself if you
[Guest]: get it.
[Guest]: But if you had to read a book on say grammar, you know, like you read leaves shoots,
[Amit Varma]: Eat shoots leaves, right?
[Amit Varma]: Which itself contains many errors.
[Guest]: But you read that kind of book and you say, hey, this is fun.
[Unknown]: This isn't like all hard work, right?
[Guest]: But then you read one essay like the death of the author by Roland Barthes, and you have
[Guest]: to rethink the way you thought about reading altogether.
[Guest]: And I think that essay for me was like a changing point, a turning point where all the old ideas
[Guest]: go out to the window, and then you realize that you need to find a different way to read
[Guest]: altogether.
[Guest]: To me, one of the biggest educations in how to read is crime writing.
[Guest]: Because when you read a crime novel, which is really well written, I'm talking about
[Guest]: the near literary crime fiction, which so much of it actually exists, you can almost
[Guest]: unpack the way the structure works, right?
[Guest]: You can see where the red herrings were, because you will remember them, you will see how language
[Guest]: shifts in terms of description, atmosphere, to the crispness of dialogue, to light and
[Guest]: sound and shape, all the things that go into making something of complete experience, it's
[Guest]: all there in crime fiction, in the best of crime fiction.
[Guest]: And when you read that, in a way, it's like reading poetry, because a lot of it is also
[Guest]: about exploring other worlds, other countries, other cultures.
[Guest]: So much of your understanding of culture can come from crime fiction, which is very close
[Guest]: to the ground in those places and looks at the underbelly of things and the governance
[Guest]: and all of that, that I think you arrive at an understanding of how text works.
[Guest]: And even if you're not a crime fiction fan, I think if you're a reader, and if you're
[Guest]: an editor, I think it's great learning more than reading a book about how to read or write.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I absolutely agree with you, especially about poetry, just looking, I think poetry,
[Amit Varma]: if you're reading carefully forces you to look at language with a granularity that then
[Amit Varma]: enhances your understanding of it and your use of it if you're a writer.
[Amit Varma]: And with crime fiction, I guess, again, using an economist term, one could say that the
[Amit Varma]: incentives of a crime writer are very functional.
[Amit Varma]: He has to keep the reader hooked, he has to, you know, the imperative for him is to keep
[Amit Varma]: moving the action forward, but also he wants to paint as rich a world as he can within
[Amit Varma]: that constraint.
[Guest]: So you do see a lot of...
[Guest]: And also remember that some of the best crime fiction then ends up being a series with the
[Guest]: same character having to be true to that same character, but plot changing every time, enough
[Guest]: of a deepening of character that you will continue to find new things in each book.
[Guest]: So I'm reading a Jack Reacher at the moment, which I think that man is like the kind of
[Guest]: man I'd like to be someday.
[Guest]: Just walking off into the wild with one set of clothes and one toothbrush and that's all
[Guest]: he has.
[Guest]: And he just lives every day in that moment.
[Guest]: I mean, it's like a philosophy of life, which you don't expect to find in crime fiction,
[Guest]: which you do here.
[Guest]: And all of these kinds of... from the P.D.
[Guest]: James on where it was, it's beautiful, it's literary, and, you know, the individual in
[Guest]: that English countryside is very different from the ex-marine in America.
[Guest]: But somewhere it's the same hunt for meaning.
[Guest]: It's the same search for the things that will make life worth living.
[Guest]: And I think as they are in literary fiction, crime fiction articulates that hopelessness
[Guest]: and the need to stay, survive and hope.
[Guest]: Because every time somebody dies, somebody is trying to find an answer to why.
[Guest]: And in that finding, you also find a reason to live.
[Guest]: And I think people underestimate what crime fiction can do to you, not just in terms of
[Guest]: how to read, but also in terms of what they take away each time from a really sharp novel
[Guest]: in that genre.
[Guest]: So yeah, why did I just go on and on about crime fiction?
[Amit Varma]: No, and that's actually a very profound observation.
[Amit Varma]: And I was reminded, for example, of Sir Wal and Walu, who, of course, you know, the remarkable
[Amit Varma]: series starting with, I think, Roseanne was the first book and they came at the crime
[Amit Varma]: series, not just with the sense that let's write an interesting crime series, but also
[Amit Varma]: with a vision of the world and a vision of what society is and should be.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so occasionally, every 50 pages, there'll be this irritating paragraph, which
[Unknown]: rants against capitalism.
[Amit Varma]: But quite apart from that, it's and I think they set the trend for a lot of the sort of
[Amit Varma]: crime fiction which follows, which kind of brings me to a related question that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, where is the Indian crime fiction?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I mean, I know there's quite a lot of it, but surely, you know, in different
[Unknown]: disparate sort of ways, Surendra Mohan Pathak kind of way and, you know, stray literary
[Guest]: attempts here and there, but, you know, we don't have...
[Guest]: It isn't yet a sort of full fledged segment.
[Guest]: There have been books, Anita Nair's Gowda series comes to mind, Arjun Gend and his historical
[Guest]: series.
[Guest]: So, of course, there's writers located in the West who are writing within Indian situations.
[Guest]: I think it's starting up in a more sort of concrete way.
[Guest]: But I worry that the visual world actually is not allowing that to grow so much because
[Guest]: there's so much great crime, so much great action on your screens all the time, your
[Guest]: Netflix and Prime and whatever else you're doing, watching that.
[Guest]: I feel like a lot of good, possibly good crime writers are probably writing for those spaces
[Guest]: now and are not so interested in the book, which gives them much less in terms of readership
[Guest]: or numbers, as opposed to the viewership.
[Guest]: And also, of course, in terms of less money, they earn much more writing that same thing
[Guest]: for somebody else who's going to make a big production out of it.
[Guest]: So I don't know how much perseverance there will be in that community of crime writers.
[Guest]: I hope to continue.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, that's a question I was saving for the end.
[Amit Varma]: So before we go in for a break, I'll ask it anyway, if a little early since you brought
[Amit Varma]: the subject up, that, you know, a lot of creative people, a lot of imaginative people who would
[Amit Varma]: otherwise have taken to writing books now have other options for their creative juices.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they can work on a web series, they can even go into filmmaking, or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are so many options available out there.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I remember thinking when I first saw The Wire all those years ago, absolutely loving
[Amit Varma]: it because of its novelistic sweep, the way it slowly unfolds.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not like a, you know, typically, I think of a film as something like a short
[Amit Varma]: story that you've got, you know, that one linear strand and maybe one or two others,
[Amit Varma]: but that's about it.
[Amit Varma]: But The Wire build this novelistic universe and carries it through for seven seasons.
[Amit Varma]: But then that also means that people who have the urges to build worlds like that, and to
[Amit Varma]: go that deep and to talk about those things don't necessarily have to turn to pen and
[Amit Varma]: paper to do it.
[Amit Varma]: There are other ways.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you see affecting books in the future?
[Amit Varma]: You are like, no, there's a space for everything we'll manage.
[Guest]: I think there's a space for everything.
[Guest]: I think there's a space for people who want to write for that space and also write books.
[Guest]: I also know, Amish, for instance, is a writer I work with as well.
[Guest]: And in this context, I remember Amish saying that he still wants to keep writing books
[Guest]: because he feels that is his individual space where his mind, his thinking, his philosophy
[Guest]: of life is what he's working on.
[Guest]: It isn't what will fit somebody else's idea of what works on screen.
[Guest]: It isn't that there are multiple screenwriters and dialogue writers and all of these people
[Guest]: who are going to come into the picture and take your idea and make it something else.
[Guest]: It's like if you want the purity of your own words and your own thoughts, then perhaps
[Guest]: the book is the only place where you can get that kind of concentrated individuality rather
[Guest]: than something on screen, which is obviously the effort of multiple minds and multiple
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: So apart from the book, I doubt there's any other place.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I think of like two kinds of tragic opportunity costs that come in.
[Amit Varma]: One, obviously, is that the screen pays so much better.
[Amit Varma]: And once you get drawn into that, and then you start living that lifestyle, also, it
[Amit Varma]: seems a waste to give it up and write a book.
[Amit Varma]: And also the other thing that I have found from living in Bombay, though I never myself
[Amit Varma]: have tried to put a foot in the film world, but what I see around me is that maybe one
[Unknown]: out of 100 projects will get through.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of the work that a writer does could basically be wasted, either it doesn't get
[Amit Varma]: made or if it gets made, it gets made badly.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not something you can own up to and years can pass by like that.
[Amit Varma]: While if you write a book, however bad, it is still your own product, like Amish told
[Amit Varma]: you, that's where his own individuality comes.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I think what happens very often, and you know, many more writers than me, so
[Amit Varma]: you'll be able to tell me if I'm, if this observation is valid, is that a lot of writers,
[Amit Varma]: when they start out aren't necessarily good writers, but they'll muddle through one book
[Amit Varma]: and they'll muddle through another and then at some point in time, just by doing repeatedly,
[Amit Varma]: they get better at it.
[Amit Varma]: And that initial self delusion about how good they are, when they weren't good, actually
[Amit Varma]: makes them good.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, you can say they fake it till they make it.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and we were talking crime fiction.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are so many crime series I can think of, which start off in a very iffy way.
[Unknown]: The first two or three books aren't quite there.
[Unknown]: And then the writer solidifies in the voice and then it just becomes something else entirely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Siowal and Walu actually being an exception to that, because I think the beginning
[Guest]: was good.
[Amit Varma]: The beginning was stunning.
[Amit Varma]: Is there something to that?
[Amit Varma]: And then is there the danger that the two or three books that a writer might need to
[Amit Varma]: sort of find their feet and become better?
[Amit Varma]: They don't happen because maybe after the first one, the guy just says, okay, you know,
[Amit Varma]: let me do that instead.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, and that's like the show is called the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe, you know, that is the unseen that what doesn't happen.
[Guest]: I think that's one of those things in publishing, which has now become a story to remember and
[Guest]: to hold on to, to prove that things can change, which is you will have a writer who's done
[Guest]: maybe two books, which haven't sold very much, which are 2000 copies, maybe, and if the editor
[Guest]: and the publisher will persevere with them, then sometimes a third or fourth book might
[Guest]: hit it so big that there's no looking back.
[Guest]: I think Bridges of Madison County is one of those stories where the writer did not really
[Guest]: do all that much.
[Guest]: And then suddenly there was this multi million copy seller, and things changed, right?
[Guest]: Now, if that person had given up at that point and said, I'll go write for another forum,
[Guest]: or the publisher had said, I'm sorry, I can't afford to keep you any longer.
[Guest]: Things could have been very, very different.
[Guest]: But I think there are enough stories in the past, and in our own kind of mythologizing
[Guest]: of the past that allows for people to hold on to hope and say, if not now, the next time
[Guest]: the next time, and you go on like that.
[Guest]: And as I said, as long as they're not doing just that, as long as they have other sources
[Guest]: of work and income and all of that, they might still persevere because they care deeply enough
[Guest]: to do this.
[Guest]: And because those hours that they spend with their characters, and in their own minds and
[Guest]: on the paper, I think they attach a certain value to it, which they would not give up
[Guest]: for the world.
[Guest]: And in that sense, also publishing, I think is a slightly odd and paradoxical space, because
[Guest]: look at where it comes from.
[Guest]: You're a writer, you sit alone at your table at your laptop, whatever, and you write quietly,
[Guest]: for yourself almost.
[Guest]: When it comes to me as a finished book, I'm sitting there quietly by myself absorbing
[Guest]: this text with nobody else interfering.
[Guest]: There's no sound, there's nothing.
[Guest]: I'm making up the sounds for these people.
[Guest]: I'm making up the voices.
[Guest]: I'm breathing in the gaps.
[Guest]: And I'm providing all the visual atmosphere, everything.
[Guest]: But what is the publisher gearing up for?
[Guest]: These two isolated acts at the end, these quiet moments.
[Guest]: And what lies in between is a completely public system of selection, distribution, marketing,
[Guest]: selling, putting a lot of noise into everything, which has to begin and end in quietness.
[Guest]: And I think that paradox is exactly the nature of all that we do around books, that there
[Guest]: are always forces pulling completely in opposite directions.
[Guest]: What one wants to do, what one ends up doing, what comes in between, they're all contradictory.
[Guest]: And yet we have to make peace with this chaos and arrive at something that will last for
[Guest]: a long time.
[Guest]: Because what is the difference between that piece of journalism or that bit of movie making?
[Guest]: You often find that movies can be dated, right?
[Guest]: Because you have a visual, a look to that space.
[Guest]: And 10 years down, there are people wearing different clothes, there's different things
[Guest]: happening.
[Guest]: So either you treat them as classics and working in that time.
[Guest]: Whereas in a book, like, you know, if I go and watch You've Got Mail Now, which I happen
[Guest]: to do accidentally the other day, and I thought, oh, this is such a different old world movie,
[Guest]: you know, everything is old about it.
[Guest]: But I can read a book, which is Jane Austen in England, in that time.
[Guest]: And because I'm the one who's providing the acoustics for this in my present time, it
[Guest]: will always be a contemporary work.
[Guest]: Because what I attach to that word, the meaning of that word may have changed over hundreds
[Guest]: of years.
[Guest]: But what it is now is my word, my meaning.
[Guest]: So I read it for myself.
[Guest]: I don't have to stick to the sound or the effects of what is available to me given by
[Guest]: somebody else.
[Guest]: So in that sense, you reinvent text and reinvent in solitude, what is not possible to reinvent
[Guest]: when it's a public act offered in public spaces.
[Guest]: So I think that's what makes publishing special.
[Guest]: I think it allows you to create work that has the capacity to last in ways that probably
[Guest]: nothing else does except a great work of art.
[Guest]: And it's, it's wrong to underestimate the finished that final book, which may seem like
[Guest]: a dead object to a lot of people, but I think it's ever going to go away.
[Guest]: I mean, the nature of paper might change, it might come from another kind of recyclable
[Guest]: recycled paper than it is today.
[Guest]: And I cannot for the life of me imagine a world where people would not value quietness,
[Guest]: solitude, your own ideas, your own mind, and to put yourself at the center of your world,
[Guest]: which is what everyone aspires to do.
[Guest]: A book allows you the room and the system almost to say this is all right, this is a
[Guest]: good space for you to be in.
[Guest]: And there's nothing wrong with wanting to be quietly with yourself.
[Guest]: And the book is part of that experience.
[Amit Varma]: No, I completely agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you've described the magic of reading formal eloquently than I could manage.
[Amit Varma]: But then there is also that other thing that it is not quite true that unlike a film, a
[Amit Varma]: book doesn't date or change in what it brings to the reader, because what I find increasingly
[Amit Varma]: happening and often to my distress is that there is an overlay of contemporary politics
[Amit Varma]: being applied to books of the past and the way you read them.
[Amit Varma]: For example, in it, but in who we both grew up with, and, you know, a golly borg, and
[Amit Varma]: you know, all this talk of racism and white privilege and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent, I understand that as we evolve as people and our prisms and our values
[Amit Varma]: evolve that will naturally affect the way that we read.
[Amit Varma]: On the other extreme, I sometimes think that we go too far in doing this by overlaying
[Amit Varma]: this veneer of contemporary political values on an age and a time when they didn't really
[Amit Varma]: exist and you sometimes just have to give the author the benefit of her contemporaneity.
[Guest]: Yes, no, I agree with you entirely.
[Guest]: I think one has to learn to read things within their context.
[Guest]: And that is the most important thing.
[Guest]: Without context, you have nothing just as you have your own context that writer had
[Guest]: theirs and you have to build bridges between them.
[Guest]: So I think the way to tackle that is really not to say don't read, but to say, come up
[Guest]: with reinterpretations.
[Guest]: For instance, for me, in terms of reading, one of the vital moments of discovery I remember
[Guest]: was Jean Gris' White Sargasso Sea.
[Guest]: I had read nothing like it before.
[Guest]: I had not realized you could even do this.
[Guest]: And the reimagining of that character just, I mean, it was a hugely political act.
[Guest]: It was a deeply feminist act.
[Guest]: It was every ism you can think of was in that slim book.
[Guest]: And that, I think, is what I would value that somebody says, I don't agree with that worldview
[Guest]: of that writer who wrote it in that time.
[Guest]: Yes, of course, it was a product of that time.
[Guest]: But let me think about it from my time and see how I might tell it differently and encourage
[Guest]: and inspire other people to read it differently and leave that old text alone for what it
[Guest]: was.
[Guest]: Let the Mahabharata be the Mahabharata of whoever wrote it then.
[Guest]: You tell your tellings now.
[Guest]: You prioritize and centralize whoever you want to and write it for your time.
[Guest]: But I agree with you that censoring and re-editing old texts for sanitizing or for concealing
[Guest]: a truth that is valuable in itself.
[Guest]: And sometimes just knowing that that's what was done is enough to make you want to think
[Guest]: never do that in your own time.
[Guest]: I think that is a mistake to erase the past in that way.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And when we come back, instead of erasing the past, we'll go back to your past because
[Amit Varma]: we really haven't spoken much about your journey through publishing.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to talk a little bit about that after this quick break.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another awesome week on the IVM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you aren't following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IVM Podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Also quick reminder, please do fill out our survey.
[Unknown]: It's at ivmpodcast.com slash survey.
[Unknown]: It's a listener survey.
[Unknown]: We're trying to understand more about who's listening to our stuff, what kind of things
[Unknown]: you would like to see from us in the future, what you have been seeing so far, what you
[Unknown]: think of it, what shows you like, all kinds of different stuff, also who you are.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Unknown]: So I mean, like all kinds of different stuff.
[Unknown]: Just please do come in and fill it out.
[Unknown]: It'll be really helpful.
[Unknown]: That's ivmpodcast.com slash survey.
[Unknown]: I want to thank our sponsors this week, Cambly, Intel and Storytel.
[Unknown]: Remember, sponsors are what make this stuff possible.
[Unknown]: So if you enjoy the content, please do thank our sponsors.
[Unknown]: We have two new shows releasing this week.
[Unknown]: Lakshmi Krishnan, better known as Literary Chills on Twitter, talks to agents of literary
[Unknown]: culture on her show Lit Nama.
[Unknown]: She plunges deep into new genres of literature born in the digital era as she talks to the
[Unknown]: performers, storytellers, bloggers, poets and writers.
[Unknown]: New episodes are out every Tuesday from 10th December.
[Unknown]: The Traveling Professor's Diary is hosted by Siddharth Teshmukh.
[Unknown]: It's a show about a curious human being with an eagerness for travel and observation.
[Unknown]: He visits colleges such as MICA, SPJ, Symbiosis, FLAME, UpGrad, Talentage and spreads the digital
[Unknown]: gospel of design, marketing and business transformation.
[Unknown]: Episodes are out every Tuesday and Thursday starting 10th of December.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by the man who writes the famous Amul hoardings, Manish
[Unknown]: Chouhairy.
[Unknown]: He talks about his life in advertising and bonds with Cyrus over their love of Bappi
[Unknown]: Lahiri.
[Unknown]: On Mr. & Mrs. Binge Watch, Janice and Anirudh deep dive into season 2 of Jack Ryan.
[Unknown]: They discuss how it measures up with other globe-trotting spy shows.
[Unknown]: On The Origin of Things, Chuck narrates a story about the achievements, awards and the
[Unknown]: rules that were changed by a particular bank.
[Unknown]: On Tupperty Tales, meet the character Samira who talks about Azadi Ka Room woven by our
[Unknown]: storyteller Madhuri.
[Unknown]: What is Azadi Ka Room and can we find it today?
[Unknown]: On the Filter Coffee Podcast, Karthik is joined by co-founders of the News Minute, Dhanya
[Unknown]: Rajendra and Vignesh Velover.
[Unknown]: Together they talk about the initial days of the News Minute and give their viewpoints
[Unknown]: of how news is provided in India.
[Unknown]: On Advertising is Dead, Varun is joined by Chief Digital Officer at Hansa Hex Equity,
[Unknown]: Nishad Ramachandran.
[Unknown]: They talk about how marketing is converging around a digital customer hub.
[Unknown]: On Golgappa, Tripti is joined by Anish Vyavhare, a spoken word poet who talks about his love
[Unknown]: for poetry and recites some poems about food.
[Unknown]: The Habit Coach completes one year of great habits.
[Unknown]: Ashton is joined by Urmi Kothari, the host of the Kinetic Living Podcast.
[Unknown]: They talk about her fitness journey and her philosophy behind exercising.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with PK Karthika about Indian publishing.
[Amit Varma]: Karthika, you were just telling me about how in 97 when Arundhati Roy hit the Indian publishing
[Amit Varma]: scene, everything kind of changed for Indian publishing.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: I remember that it was unusual in that there was a story attached to how she had nearly
[Guest]: published with a publisher in India and then not published with them for personal reasons.
[Guest]: And how there was so much excitement about her finding an agent who was so thrilled by
[Guest]: it that he flew to India to meet her.
[Guest]: These were all quite extraordinary.
[Guest]: They were extraordinary in that time that there were things like that happening around
[Guest]: us, you know.
[Guest]: So it was hard to understand, to grasp at that time.
[Guest]: It was only later, after everything played out, that you realized how significant all
[Guest]: this was.
[Guest]: But at that time, it was like a new wave of confidence for writers and for editors and
[Guest]: for readers and for just about everyone, because it was like a ratification of and a validation
[Guest]: of what was considered to be literary by us, what was considered to be good writing, what
[Guest]: was publishable.
[Guest]: I mean, if all of these things culminated in a book that won in those days the biggest
[Guest]: prize of all in literature in the English speaking world, then we had to be doing something
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: I mean, the writers had to be doing something right.
[Guest]: Readers were getting something right.
[Guest]: Publishing houses were doing this right.
[Guest]: Though, of course, the story of that is that a little publishing house was actually set
[Guest]: up to publish that book because she wanted that to happen, which in itself was unusual,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That you have so much confidence in one book that you would set up a system to make that
[Guest]: happen.
[Guest]: So a lot of things changed with that.
[Guest]: It also meant that in a strange way, we started getting clones of Arundhati Roy, submitting
[Guest]: manuscript left, right and center.
[Guest]: Basically everyone was writing novels about Kerala, about family, about relationships
[Guest]: set within an India that was not really a westernized India.
[Guest]: So many new directions seem to open up.
[Guest]: At the same time, I think the problem also that it gave us was this firm notion that
[Guest]: that literary novel of that kind was the thing that had to be.
[Guest]: So for instance, in the UK, a lot of writers were suddenly given large advances because
[Guest]: they were all going to be like the next Booker Prize winning novelist.
[Guest]: And large advances suddenly came into the picture in which they hadn't earlier.
[Guest]: I mean, Penguin was still one of the few publishing houses then that was giving advances to every
[Guest]: writer, but a lot of publishing didn't.
[Guest]: And if you think about it, I almost wish it hadn't changed, because think about publishing
[Guest]: as a business model, and it is deeply flawed.
[Guest]: You are writing a book, which you haven't like perhaps written only a proposal for you
[Guest]: haven't really written very much off.
[Guest]: I am an editor in a publishing house.
[Guest]: And I'm saying to you, I want to publish this book when it's done.
[Guest]: This could be two years from now, three years from now, whatever.
[Guest]: And I'm going to give you this money as a kind of ceiling of an agreement that you will
[Guest]: eventually finish this.
[Guest]: So I'm investing money in something of which there is nothing to show at the moment.
[Guest]: And then two years down the line, maybe three years down the line, you will give me a manuscript,
[Guest]: which I will publish in another six months, eight months a year, for which I will then
[Guest]: get paid by the market in this endless cycle of no payments or near payments, which could
[Guest]: be within three months or six months or eight months or a year.
[Guest]: At the end of a year or two years, I might be sent all these physical copies back from
[Guest]: the market saying they were never sold.
[Guest]: And my investment was made three years ago.
[Guest]: And at the end of that period, I've got nothing to show except some returns, which then are
[Guest]: in the warehouse and which one might be forced to, you know, destroy because they're shop
[Guest]: soiled or can't be resold or whatever.
[Guest]: So everything is strange and beats logic.
[Guest]: I don't know of any other industry that works in this manner, which defies logic and defies
[Guest]: the odds and still continues to survive.
[Guest]: And the strange thing is that from then on to now, we have found no other way to do this.
[Guest]: We continue to be in the cycle of investment without possibly any sign of return for the
[Guest]: foreseeable future.
[Guest]: So in some ways, I guess it began in that period when big advances seemed all right,
[Guest]: because you thought you had this large print run that was possible at the end of it and
[Guest]: large lakhs of readers who would want to read that copy.
[Guest]: So from what might have been like a 15,000 rupee advance, which was very standard in
[Guest]: those days, I remember even like the best international writers who had publishers in
[Guest]: the US and the UK, you would write out a contract where it's a 20,000 rupees advance.
[Guest]: And that was fine, because that was all really you hoped to earn.
[Guest]: Suddenly you were adding zeros to that and you were saying, oh, we should do two lakhs.
[Guest]: And we all just were banking on the fact that something would take off.
[Guest]: So where we were much more careful and cautious and realistic, it became a little bit more
[Guest]: of a gamble.
[Guest]: And because there was enough competition by then and other publishing houses were setting
[Guest]: up and there was more everyone trying to, you know, zero in on that little pool of writers
[Guest]: that was there in the English language at that time.
[Guest]: Everyone was trying to up the other and give a little bit more money to get that writer
[Guest]: in the book.
[Guest]: So we ended up where we are now, which is very unrealistic figures, unrealistic estimations
[Guest]: of sale and very little to show at the end of it as proof that this system works.
[Guest]: So there was a time when I said everything changed positively when the book happened
[Guest]: to us.
[Guest]: But after that many years, I'm beginning to think there were problems that came off that,
[Guest]: which we are now discovering the depth of.
[Amit Varma]: So let me just try to sort of think aloud a little bit and unpack this whole effect.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, it kind of goes back to that earlier issue of heuristics that we talk about that
[Amit Varma]: how do you decide what is a good book and how do you decide what to commission and what
[Amit Varma]: kind of books to change.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess what happens with the God of Small Things is that there's suddenly the survivorship
[Amit Varma]: bias where there is this book written in expressionistic language set in an exotic locale that seems
[Amit Varma]: to work and therefore because that one book has done so well and won the booker, then
[Amit Varma]: it is natural for publishers to want more of the same and you give advances chasing
[Amit Varma]: that and because in publishing, unlike in other businesses, like for example, web series
[Amit Varma]: is a commission today pretty much the same way, but you know, the lifeline is much shorter.
[Unknown]: They play out in a much shorter span of time.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess with publishing is taking two or three years and therefore for two or three
[Amit Varma]: years, you don't know that your investments been a waste and you have a lot of books in
[Amit Varma]: that language about you know, those kind of things coming out and they are wasted and
[Amit Varma]: what also that seems to do is it seems to have what economists would call the crowding
[Amit Varma]: out effect that because there is so much money chasing this particular kind of book, which
[Amit Varma]: there is, you know, the notion that this is a kind of book which will win awards and which
[Amit Varma]: will sell and which will bring glory and so on and so forth, that perhaps there is less
[Amit Varma]: money left to chase or left to fund other writers who are writing different kinds of
[Guest]: books.
[Amit Varma]: Is that sort of an accurate summation of what kind of went down?
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: I think that's what happened.
[Guest]: And in the process, we also discovered that there were some great writers amongst us and
[Guest]: some great books were published and a lot of first time writers found support in a way
[Guest]: they may not have otherwise, which I think is the most valuable thing that happened.
[Guest]: Because then the next generation of writers had a different felicity with the language,
[Guest]: a different brashness with the language, wrote for the world more confidently without doubting
[Guest]: themselves in the same way.
[Guest]: Not, I mean, I think all writers doubt themselves, but not doubting that they could be as good
[Guest]: as anybody else.
[Guest]: And that was really, really the best outcome of that period.
[Guest]: But what that crowding out did, I think, was also very important to notice that there were
[Guest]: certain kinds of writing that never did come out enough, that people didn't pay enough
[Guest]: attention to or put value to.
[Guest]: And that is why I think the next shift is Chetan Bhagat, because that was, to my mind,
[Guest]: looking back, that was a direct revolt against the ivory tower existence of that English
[Guest]: literary space, where the reader was a certain kind of person, a privileged person, a person
[Guest]: whose notions of what was acceptable and civilized was very different.
[Guest]: And where there was no recognition of the fact that there are multiple cultures and
[Guest]: languages and so many other things happening outside of the metropolitan Indian city.
[Guest]: And then I think we got to a place where it wasn't about what comes before, that is the
[Guest]: writing, the publishing, the editing, it was about what happens after, which is the marketing.
[Guest]: And that shift really redefined everything in publishing as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess what Chetan did was, of course, one, he took themes which resonated with common
[Amit Varma]: people like life in an IIT or, you know, and interstate love affairs or whatever the kind
[Amit Varma]: of topics that he's chosen, sort of resonate with many more people.
[Amit Varma]: And second, there was a marketing and did that sort of the massive success that Chetan
[Amit Varma]: had and then that people that are similar writers after him also build their markets,
[Amit Varma]: Ravinders and Durjoy's and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Did that then change those within publishing to sort of re examine your own values of what
[Amit Varma]: makes a good book and what kind of book are you looking for?
[Amit Varma]: Do you start reading a little differently and asking yourself more questions?
[Guest]: Absolutely, all of that.
[Guest]: When Chetan first did the rounds of the publishing houses, I mean, everyone knows that he was
[Guest]: turned down by most people who didn't see this.
[Guest]: I think the fact that a writer had a PowerPoint presentation about how to sell the book, it
[Guest]: just went against the notions of every literary editor in any publishing house because they
[Guest]: thought that it had to come as a consequence of a great book you sold.
[Guest]: It was all supposed to be organic.
[Guest]: There was like you couldn't put a system in place to to manufacture sales.
[Guest]: You know, these were all not good words.
[Guest]: They didn't exist in our vocabulary.
[Guest]: We were supposed to find the best and the best would automatically sell, which we know
[Guest]: is not the truth at all.
[Guest]: There was a certain naivety in publishing.
[Guest]: There were a lot of young people in it with little experience of publishing who just,
[Guest]: I think, lived in slightly idealistic spaces in their own heads and everything around them
[Guest]: supported that idealism that said a good thing would find its way to the world in the right
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: Chetan changed that for sure.
[Guest]: There was a lot of resistance even later.
[Guest]: Everyone wanted to, I think, think it was a flash in the pan.
[Guest]: And yes, of course, this happened.
[Guest]: But there was cynicism in that people questioned the ways of selling.
[Guest]: And was this the right way to sell and market a book?
[Guest]: And can a book be a product?
[Guest]: So marketing and editorials would get into fisticuffs about marketing saying, well, you
[Guest]: know, it is also like a button or a piece of chocolate.
[Guest]: You've got to sell it and you've got to find the right ways to sell it.
[Guest]: An editorial would probably think this was really not the right way to talk about it.
[Guest]: I still know editors and senior editors in publishing houses who will say, we don't like
[Guest]: the word content.
[Unknown]: We don't like the word consumer.
[Guest]: Can we please talk about readers?
[Guest]: Can we talk about how we used to be at one time and, you know, not change it so drastically?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this kind of snobbery is rife in that ultimate performative space Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: where people will say, oh, you cannot refer to books as content or whatever.
[Guest]: Yeah, unfortunately, that doesn't really hold good anymore.
[Guest]: We've got to rethink it.
[Guest]: And I think that kind of rethinking was forced by the success of the writers that we mentioned.
[Guest]: Because then you also discovered a second market, second, third, whatever you want to
[Guest]: call it, which is outside the metros.
[Guest]: Somebody had imagined that these books were going to reach readers in places outside Delhi,
[Guest]: Bombay, Madras, whatever.
[Guest]: And suddenly you're saying, who are these people?
[Guest]: Who are these people that we never think about?
[Guest]: Who we never planned for?
[Guest]: What do they want to read?
[Guest]: And what is their comfort level with the language?
[Guest]: With what is the tradition of reading or the background in reading they're bringing to
[Guest]: this?
[Guest]: And for so long, we'd assumed that the reader who reads our literary fiction or any fiction
[Guest]: at all was already trained in the classics.
[Guest]: In some way, they had read a lot before they came to it.
[Guest]: So you always had to better, you always had to like ride on those shoulders and create
[Guest]: an Indian text that came from the Western liberal tradition.
[Guest]: Which if you think about it, is pretty nonsensical.
[Guest]: Because your experience is rooted here, your writing has to come from here, which is the
[Guest]: other marvelous thing that Arundhati did, right?
[Guest]: She wrote from here, off here, with language homegrown in many ways, experience homegrown.
[Guest]: So it changed everything then.
[Guest]: And when you discover that people wanted to read writers like Chetan, because they also
[Guest]: wanted to be seen to be reading, seen to be reading in English, seen to be carrying a
[Guest]: book that was written in English and saying, I have the ability to read this.
[Guest]: This was bringing a different sense of how society worked, how individuals wanted to
[Guest]: be seen and how the entire tradition of writing that we had thought we were building on was
[Guest]: completely wrong.
[Guest]: These were people who may have read a lot of writing in other languages and then come
[Guest]: to Chetan.
[Guest]: So their idea of a text and their idea of what makes a text work could be very different
[Guest]: from what an English speaking, English reading editor in a publishing house thinks of as
[Guest]: the foundation for a book.
[Guest]: These were completely drastic rethinks that had to be done.
[Guest]: And I don't know if we've succeeded even now, because that lack of diversity within publishing
[Guest]: houses, the kind of people who come to publishing in English language, there is still that sense
[Guest]: of, I don't want to call it snobbery, because that's belittling what is much more than that.
[Guest]: There's a sensibility there, which is different.
[Guest]: But I think editors are coming to terms with that, publishing houses are coming to terms
[Guest]: with that.
[Guest]: And what is helping is bilinguality or trilinguality.
[Guest]: I think a lot of editors in publishing houses now have access to more than the English language
[Guest]: and are consciously aware that they have to be part of other worlds and other cultures
[Guest]: to be better at their job in an English language publishing space, which is a completely different
[Guest]: thing from what it was 15 years ago, where you kept looking for that Western educated
[Guest]: Oxfordian, you know, like the experience had to be of being able to access sophisticated
[Guest]: narrative in the West in order to be able to do well here.
[Guest]: But now I think most of us who speak to colleagues in editorial departments, all of us value
[Guest]: the person who can tell us more about Malayalam or Telugu or Tamil or Bengali than someone
[Guest]: who can tell us what the best of American writing is doing now, because that we know
[Guest]: how to access as well.
[Guest]: But this is much more that you have to be of that place.
[Guest]: And not too many learn to occupy that space.
[Guest]: So that diversity is bringing in the next level of thinking we need.
[Amit Varma]: I guess, you know, when the future of Indian literature is written in the future by a future
[Amit Varma]: historian, she will inevitably have to grapple with the question all historians grapple with,
[Amit Varma]: which is a great man theory of history, Carlisle theory that you know, do great men, Carlisle,
[Amit Varma]: of course, use the term great men, but do great people shape history or are there currents
[Amit Varma]: of history which are independent and, you know, whatever great people emerged from that
[Amit Varma]: as purely happenstance and in that regard, I'm sort of wondering that, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: massive explosion of readers outside the metros in small town India at around the time Chetan
[Amit Varma]: Bhagat came up, would you say that that hunger for reading English and being seen to be reading
[Amit Varma]: English was an inevitable consequence of post liberalization India the way it was developing
[Amit Varma]: in any case in Chetan just happened to be at the right time at the right place?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you think Chetan really did play a huge part in sort of making it fructify sooner
[Amit Varma]: than it perhaps would have?
[Amit Varma]: Do you have a sense?
[Guest]: I think it's that old thing.
[Guest]: If we if Chetan hadn't come along, we would have had to invent a Chetan because the time
[Guest]: was such that something had to shift for us to find our own bearings and not allow it
[Guest]: to drift into a space where nobody actually belonged.
[Guest]: And nobody could anchor it in anything but a space outside.
[Guest]: So what Chetan did was, I think, recognize what was going on and feel strongly enough
[Guest]: about it to put himself on the line because I don't think it was an easy job to go out
[Guest]: there and say I'm a writer is always a tough job to go out there and say I'm a writer who
[Guest]: thinks I can sell a hundred thousand copies at a time when nobody did that.
[Guest]: That is audacity of the sort that you would not even dream of for the most part, but he
[Guest]: did and that allowed everything to change quite dramatically.
[Guest]: So I would think it's a combination of things and if it hadn't been Chetan, someone else
[Guest]: would at some point have done it.
[Guest]: Like later Amish came along and transformed that other space of mythology and retellings.
[Guest]: If he hadn't, I guess somebody else would have.
[Guest]: But the important thing I think is that now things have settled into a space where that
[Guest]: wave is over.
[Guest]: And interestingly, very few have followed in that space.
[Guest]: Like you still have Chetan Bhagat at the top of the bestseller charts week after week after
[Guest]: week.
[Guest]: It is quite extraordinary.
[Guest]: A decade in, he's still on top.
[Guest]: And that so many other writers who tried to write like him haven't stayed there.
[Guest]: So it seems now that that time too is perhaps over.
[Guest]: We are waiting for the next thing to happen, but nobody knows what that next thing is.
[Guest]: And it's very difficult to predict what it could be.
[Guest]: And also, as we can see in front of us that reading itself is becoming challenging, writing
[Guest]: is becoming challenging in this space.
[Guest]: What is it that is going to take that space and suddenly sweep all the rules away?
[Amit Varma]: One doesn't know, but it's going to come at some point.
[Amit Varma]: Where is the Chetan Bhagat who will disrupt?
[Amit Varma]: You know, one possible reason for why Chetan continues to be where he is, of course, is
[Amit Varma]: that he's almost become like a self-reinforcing meme in the sense that he is a person for
[Amit Varma]: a certain class of people, a certain category of people.
[Unknown]: And it is cool to read.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that self reinforces itself that, you know, there are households which
[Amit Varma]: have only six books.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier back in the day, they would be like they'll have Paulo Coelho and they'll
[Amit Varma]: have whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And now Chetan Bhagat is always a mandatory part of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this reinforces itself.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not saying this with any trace of derision.
[Amit Varma]: It is better for a household to have six books and to have no books at all.
[Amit Varma]: And this is fairly remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: This friend of mine who lives in Hyderabad, in fact, and he is often on the admissions
[Amit Varma]: committee of different IIMs and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And he told me that whenever he's on an interview panel, he'll always ask the person a question,
[Unknown]: what are your hobbies?
[Amit Varma]: And whenever they say reading, which apparently 60, more than 60% of them do, his follow up
[Amit Varma]: question will be, what is the last book you read?
[Amit Varma]: And for 80% of them, it will be Chetan Bhagat.
[Amit Varma]: And this has and I think my friend said this not with an entirely positive implication,
[Amit Varma]: but this can cut both ways.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one way, of course, is that these are just people pretending to be readers and
[Amit Varma]: they're taking the one name that everybody takes.
[Amit Varma]: But the other way is that, you know, let's not look down on them because they haven't
[Amit Varma]: been privileged to have the kind of childhoods we have, where we've had access to so many
[Amit Varma]: books and be able to read so much.
[Amit Varma]: They want to read and their gateway into the world of reading is Chetan Bhagat, which is
[Amit Varma]: remarkable, which is also a conventional view of his in the past that he's introduced so
[Amit Varma]: many new people to reading.
[Amit Varma]: And that's surely a good thing, because they'll go on to read books by other authors.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that has happened or is happening?
[Guest]: There was a hope at one time that this would happen, that they would read something which
[Guest]: was easier to access, and then they would go on and climb the next rung to something
[Guest]: that was more difficult.
[Guest]: But I don't think there's anything that no data that tells us this is happening.
[Guest]: What it's telling us is possibly that they read and they said, okay, now we've been there,
[Guest]: we've done that.
[Guest]: Now off we go to watch something or do other things that have nothing to do with reading.
[Guest]: And no, we're not seeing that ladder.
[Guest]: So it's not been the most, what is the word I want?
[Guest]: I mean, it's not like somebody built a foundation on which other people are able to stand up
[Guest]: and climb and go on, which was a great like that foundation remains a foundation and what
[Amit Varma]: is to come is still and it's probably important, but we don't really know how yet.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I also think that this gateway to reading in English is a really important thing,
[Guest]: because what do kids in most situations do?
[Guest]: They go to school, they read that school textbook in English, and there's not very much to recommend
[Guest]: reading further, if you're only reading that.
[Guest]: So to find something that's entertaining, that appeals to them that relates to their
[Guest]: worlds and at the same time allows them to feel that they've gone a little further in
[Guest]: that experience.
[Guest]: It's remarkable that there just isn't enough material in that space.
[Guest]: And why isn't there enough material in that space?
[Guest]: My own feeling is that translations are the space we must look to and build to get that
[Guest]: experience.
[Guest]: Because if I am a person reading in Malayalam, and I read my English textbooks, and then
[Guest]: I go on to read, maybe I may not read the big Malayalam novel even then, because now
[Guest]: I am a person who has neither language properly, right?
[Guest]: I don't have a Malayalam well enough, because now I'm going off to live somewhere else.
[Guest]: And I don't have that.
[Guest]: I don't have my English well enough.
[Guest]: And if I have to choose to read, maybe I will choose to read in English, because that is
[Guest]: the way of aspiration and growth and all of that.
[Guest]: In which case I might choose to read a novel that applies to me closer, which would be
[Guest]: the novel which is written in Malayalam in translation English.
[Guest]: And maybe that gateway would be a powerful gateway to if we allowed ourselves to build
[Guest]: it up.
[Guest]: And that would be a very, very meaningful gateway, because that's not a gateway into
[Guest]: a culture that is alien, or that opens up worlds that we would aspire to.
[Guest]: It's a world that is very real, where we came from, where our families continue to live,
[Guest]: and where we hope there is also a future and not just the past.
[Guest]: So I think it's about a market economy and an editorial and marketing machinery, all
[Guest]: of which that has to come together and say, can we now focus on shifting the gateway to
[Guest]: our own languages, and maybe use English as a point there of entry into reading in English,
[Guest]: and not just leave Chetan Bhagat to be the one person who occupies that space.
[Amit Varma]: And it's really interesting, because you know, you point out that there is a gap there where
[Amit Varma]: there aren't enough people at that entry level sort of gateway to English reading thing and
[Amit Varma]: Chetan Bhagat came and that's great, but there should be more than that.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, were there publishers like I imagine in the late 90s, there would
[Amit Varma]: have been many publishers asking themselves, how do I find the next Arundhati Roy?
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, were there many publishers saying, how do I find the next Chetan Bhagat?
[Amit Varma]: Of course, and how much of that question is then saying that just as Chetan Bhagat was
[Amit Varma]: a manufacturer entity in the sense that he manufactured himself, he came with a PowerPoint
[Amit Varma]: of how I should promote this.
[Amit Varma]: How much was there that sense that the next Chetan Bhagat also has to be manufactured
[Amit Varma]: perhaps by us?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is this a quest that publishers sort of went down?
[Guest]: I think one of a brilliant example of that building on Chetan Bhagat is the Srishti publishing
[Guest]: program.
[Guest]: I think what they did was to say, let's create a mass market entity and every book we publish
[Guest]: will go into that.
[Guest]: And much like say a Mills and Boone brand did one time, you knew what you were getting
[Guest]: when you saw that brand, right?
[Guest]: Which is the thing that the large publishing houses have lost out on.
[Guest]: Now if you pick up a book from a major publishing house, you will recognize the logo and you
[Guest]: ascribe to it certain qualities.
[Guest]: You will say, oh, this will be a well edited book.
[Guest]: This will be error free.
[Guest]: Perhaps this will be well packaged.
[Guest]: One assumes that there is a certain requirement for this book to exist.
[Guest]: All of that is true.
[Guest]: But there is no guarantee of what the content will be like and whether there is any similarity
[Guest]: to something else that that publishing house did because each one is publishing so many
[Guest]: kinds of books.
[Guest]: But Srishti created a brand that said, whatever you pick from this list, you know exactly
[Guest]: what you're going to get.
[Guest]: And it's going to be a novel that will entertain you or which will be easy to read, which you
[Guest]: will enjoy.
[Guest]: And so pick just the brand.
[Guest]: Don't pick necessarily the writer or the book.
[Guest]: And I don't think anybody else has actually done that in the English language space.
[Guest]: Were they sort of successful?
[Guest]: I think they were very successful.
[Guest]: The difficulty with that is that when a small publishing house cannot back the writer in
[Guest]: terms of the aggressive marketing that they're often looking for, then they migrate to other
[Guest]: publishing houses that offer them more money.
[Guest]: And so they go on.
[Guest]: But I think even now, any book that Srishti does will find space in certain stores and
[Guest]: certain and people will pick them up and walk away.
[Guest]: I remember when I was in HarperCollins a few years in my colleague who was the sales person
[Guest]: in the north, he came to me and he said, ma'am, you have to publish books like this, like
[Guest]: this is what sells.
[Guest]: I went to Lucknow and they told me that this bookshelf that every now and then they have
[Guest]: to replenish like 25 copies of each book because people just walk in and look at it and they
[Guest]: just buy it and walk out.
[Guest]: They don't want to know who the writer is.
[Guest]: So the thing about publishing is obviously that we are not able to brand ourselves as
[Guest]: publishers.
[Guest]: We often have to brand the writer.
[Guest]: The writer is the brand.
[Guest]: So if you're publishing a writer today who's not published before, you have to start building
[Guest]: that brand from scratch for that writer.
[Guest]: And identity has to be built around them.
[Guest]: Then the next time they write a book, if they choose to write in the same genre, you have
[Guest]: ease of marketing, but they might choose to write a completely different novel, especially
[Guest]: literary writers.
[Guest]: They write a completely different thing the next time.
[Guest]: And then you have to start all over again, building that brand.
[Guest]: So each day, each writer, each book is a different proposition altogether.
[Guest]: Whereas if you have a brand which says this is what I am very clearly, then you don't
[Guest]: have to worry about who the writer is, how well known they are, what social media profiles
[Guest]: they have.
[Guest]: You are giving the brand the identity, and that is so much easier to market as a whole.
[Guest]: But at the moment, all of us are struggling with this fact of expansion of multiple categories
[Guest]: within each publishing house.
[Guest]: And how on earth are we to say what are we?
[Guest]: How do we identify ourselves?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I guess you could have an imprint which does only that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So we do imprints.
[Guest]: So for instance, I started up this imprint with a colleague, which is called Context.
[Guest]: So Ajita and I do that at Westland.
[Guest]: And we think of context as this literary imprint, as an imprint that does very politically engaged
[Guest]: content in fiction and nonfiction, that hopefully will do some experimental work as well, etc.
[Guest]: So we identify ourselves like that.
[Guest]: And we try and build a list like that.
[Guest]: Then we have something called Westland Sport, which is clearly a sport publishing imprint.
[Guest]: We'll have a business imprint next year.
[Guest]: So things like that you can do, right?
[Guest]: So then people go into a store and they will see it and they will say, OK, this is a business
[Guest]: imprint.
[Guest]: I don't know what to get from here.
[Guest]: But when you have sort of intangibles, where you have a novel that is just a great read,
[Guest]: a brand is difficult to sustain on books like that.
[Guest]: And yet those are the books that you really wish more people would read, because they
[Guest]: are the books that you want to curl up with on a summer afternoon and read.
[Guest]: But how on earth do you brand that then?
[Guest]: There you have to brand the writer so that people know if a Bridget Jones is written
[Guest]: by Helen Fielding, then anything she writes, hopefully, will be as entertaining and as
[Guest]: smart as that.
[Guest]: So I'll walk off with it.
[Guest]: So each time a publicist works on a book, I think they have to work on the content of
[Guest]: the book, and they have to build the writer.
[Guest]: So it's extremely complicated.
[Guest]: Bringing that book to the reader is each time a challenging task.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, just as an aside for the past few months, you guys have been sending me
[Amit Varma]: books from context.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it's actually got that very clear identity in my mind, because from what
[Amit Varma]: I have seen of the context books, some of which have featured on the show, and I've
[Amit Varma]: really enjoyed is that they all engage with contemporary India.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which is why that, you know, even the branding of context seems to me to be sort
[Amit Varma]: of very spot on.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you were talking about sort of the different categories that you have to deal with within
[Amit Varma]: a publishing house.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of this is something that's again evolved during your time in publishing.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've sort of, you know, through the 2000s, and you had all these new categories
[Unknown]: like nonfiction, like the sort of historical writing that William Dalrymple and Ram Guha
[Amit Varma]: do sort of also explored in these new appetites kind of come up.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your process of discovery of these new appetites as a publisher.
[Guest]: I think one of the instances that actually was a learning for me and a category learning
[Guest]: for ourselves as publishers was when we published Sarnath Banerjee's first graphic novel.
[Guest]: Because I remember that when that was first published, there was no graphic novel publishing.
[Guest]: Or Ajit Sen's book was the first that came out.
[Guest]: But that was not something that went out into sort of trade so much.
[Guest]: So there it was like saying, what on earth is this work?
[Guest]: What is this form?
[Guest]: What is this meant to be?
[Guest]: And how on earth are we going to sell it or get people to receive it?
[Guest]: Similarly, I think there have been points at which we've said, okay, so if you're doing
[Guest]: say an Anuja Chauhan, when Zoya Factor first came out, I had a colleague Yogesh in Harper,
[Guest]: who was very aggressive about, let's sell it, he said, let's, let's put 20,000 copies
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: And I still remember, I think it was Anant who was then at Penguin and now in Harper,
[Guest]: who called me and said, you're doing a novel, which is like 20,000 print run.
[Guest]: I'm not sure he was talking about Anuja or he was talking about another writer called
[Guest]: Sam Born, who also we'd put out very aggressively.
[Guest]: And we were like, yeah, we did that.
[Guest]: And it must have been foolhardy when you look back at it.
[Guest]: But it worked.
[Guest]: I mean, Anuja is a phenomenon.
[Guest]: And sometimes I think you get lucky.
[Guest]: You bring out a book that is in a category that doesn't quite exist, and you get the
[Guest]: right person at the right time.
[Guest]: And then you can like really build on it.
[Guest]: But it doesn't always work, because you might also then find yourself saying, okay, the
[Guest]: next big thing is a historical fiction, based on the fact that the big historical novel,
[Guest]: the big historical romance is really big in the West.
[Guest]: But you will find that there are a few writers who do really well.
[Guest]: I remember publishing Indu Sundaresan, whose Feast of Roses and that whole Noor Jahan,
[Guest]: Mughal world of big glamorous court and romance and so on, did really well, continues to be
[Guest]: in print, like what, 15 years after they were first published.
[Guest]: But it's taken 15 years after that for this sudden resurgence of writing around the Mughals
[Guest]: and popular history and so on.
[Guest]: There was very little at that time.
[Guest]: So one didn't think this time would come either.
[Guest]: But at that point, it made sense to publish one writer who was doing that.
[Guest]: So I think the categories have evolved with more people discovering that their own tastes
[Guest]: match with, say, one writer somehow.
[Guest]: It's like Vikram Seth, when A Suitable Boy came out, a lot of people suddenly said, oh,
[Guest]: this is exactly what I want to read.
[Guest]: And I didn't know I wanted to read this.
[Guest]: I think that's the same sort of discovery for an editor.
[Guest]: When I read Serious Men, the manuscript by Manu Joseph first, it was like, oh, I always
[Guest]: wanted to read a really well written novel set so deeply, you know, in our own world.
[Guest]: And I haven't read something like this for a long time.
[Guest]: And when you feel that sense of discovery and excitement, you know, it will be shared.
[Guest]: And it's a matter of just finding a way to reach those people who will share that excitement.
[Guest]: So yeah, over the years, I suppose, from poetry to graphic to literary fiction to young adult
[Guest]: writing, which again, is a very small category.
[Guest]: But occasionally you have that one spurt or one thing.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know it existed in India.
[Guest]: You know, the thing is, it exists for books that are coming in from elsewhere.
[Guest]: So everyone will read a Harry Potter and a Rick Riordan and all of that.
[Guest]: But we still to find that breakthrough here.
[Guest]: So till a suitable boy came along, nobody thought that big literary novel would have
[Guest]: a great audience in India, but it suddenly found that it had.
[Guest]: Similarly, I'm like waiting for that young adult novel that will just grab everybody
[Guest]: and say, oh, and opens up the market.
[Guest]: That is one category that has not found anything yet that is truly revolutionized the numbers.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of writerly success like as a publisher, you know, whenever you publish,
[Amit Varma]: you always have a sense that these are the guys I think will do well.
[Amit Varma]: And these are the guys who may not do so well.
[Amit Varma]: And how much does reality conform to that?
[Amit Varma]: And to what extent does the success of writers to what is the role that luck plays just happening
[Amit Varma]: to take off and hit the zeitgeist at the right time?
[Guest]: I think luck has a lot to do with that.
[Guest]: I remember when I joined Harper, this was the time when I talked about Anuja, there
[Guest]: was another writer called Advaita Akala, whose first book came out.
[Guest]: There was Karan Bajaj, whose novel that came out.
[Guest]: And we were hitting 20 to 30 to 40,000 copies of those books because the time was just right.
[Guest]: Amitabh Bagchi's first novel Above Average.
[Guest]: I remember that first year it did some 25,000 copies.
[Guest]: And all of this was completely out of the blue, but the time was right.
[Guest]: The numbers were right.
[Guest]: And everyone wanted to read that next step up on the commercial novel, you know, and
[Guest]: I think a lot of it has to do with luck.
[Guest]: It has to do with finding that.
[Guest]: And then you'll find that you've done brilliant books, which everyone thought was like the
[Guest]: best in the genre, which a few hundred people read or a couple of thousand people read,
[Guest]: were greatly reviewed, beautifully reviewed, but they just did not sell beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: Can you name some books which are favorites of yours, which you wish had done much better?
[Guest]: I can tell you one book that we published last year, which was Revati Lal's Anatomy
[Guest]: of Hate, which I think is a striking instance of a book that has everything to recommend
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Real politic, heart, new ideas, all written in a way that just goes beyond what you have
[Guest]: in that genre at the moment.
[Guest]: And of course, it was wonderfully reviewed.
[Guest]: Recently, Biblio put it on their outstanding books for the year and all of that.
[Guest]: But why are the readers not backing it in the way that it should?
[Guest]: You know, it's a mystery.
[Guest]: Why something?
[Guest]: I know that after a certain point, it's also about the profile of the writer.
[Guest]: Like after a certain point, anything that a certain writer writes, we get that first
[Guest]: pickup.
[Guest]: The first 10,000, 20,000 copies will move.
[Guest]: We know that.
[Guest]: But why is there a reluctance to back unknowns?
[Guest]: Why is there not even with marketing machinery behind it, even with reviewers backing it?
[Guest]: There's something about luck there that that seems to suggest that it's beyond you.
[Guest]: And yet I'm convinced that books like that will last.
[Guest]: We'll go on to get into citations phases, we'll go into reading in universities, and
[Guest]: we'll find a different way to remain alive and relevant.
[Guest]: This may be influence future writers.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: That means all of that could happen.
[Guest]: But here and now you wish it had that other hit of luck that would take it further.
[Amit Varma]: No, and Revati's book, which I enjoyed a lot is of course an intensely political book,
[Amit Varma]: which also brings me to a question which I think, especially in the last few years, publishers
[Amit Varma]: must have had to grapple with, which is the pressures of politics and the temptation to
[Amit Varma]: self censor something so you do not get in trouble.
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote from a piece you wrote for Caravan a few years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, when the system seems to connive with the mob to prevent free expression and dissemination
[Amit Varma]: of content, what is a publisher to do?
[Amit Varma]: The easy thing would be to follow the letter of the law and not test the ideals, if one
[Amit Varma]: could call them that, or patience of any part of society.
[Amit Varma]: An insider's account of life inside an ashram in southern India, dangerous.
[Amit Varma]: A novel that dramatizes caste conflict in Uttar Pradesh based on a real incident, potentially
[Amit Varma]: provocative.
[Amit Varma]: A study of the violence implicit in religious conversion in different parts of India, best
[Amit Varma]: avoided.
[Amit Varma]: An erotic fantasy that stars a young Muslim girl, a definite cause of anxiety.
[Amit Varma]: And so it could go on a seemingly endless list of dangerous subjects and by extension,
[Amit Varma]: unmarketable writers.
[Amit Varma]: The other way to respond would be to take the route further north, instead of throwing
[Amit Varma]: water on the wood, even before the flame is lit, to sit down and plan the fire.
[Amit Varma]: Stop good, which beautiful, very moving words.
[Amit Varma]: Explain what you mean by sitting down and planning the fire.
[Amit Varma]: Like, what is your approach?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you have not shied away from publishing books that could be controversial.
[Amit Varma]: What is your approach then?
[Guest]: How do you deal with this?
[Guest]: I think I have one clear rule, which is that you do not break the law.
[Guest]: That as long as what you've got in that work is not defamatory, not libelous, not doing
[Guest]: something that the law says is not acceptable.
[Amit Varma]: That is the one clear line to draw.
[Guest]: But the law is also so open to interpretation, right?
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: So, your legal team will help you interpret it in the way that it should be, hopefully.
[Guest]: And I think we have some very bright PR lawyers and we have an intensely sensible team in
[Guest]: house which shows us what's all right and what's not.
[Guest]: But I also think I honestly don't give a fig about people being offended in this way that
[Guest]: this nebulous can be interpreted in any way, offense.
[Guest]: You know, we've had this recent instance of that pug, I mean, the turban tying book.
[Unknown]: Have you read about that?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, people backed the book from the market and so on.
[Guest]: And I think that's a real shame.
[Guest]: I mean, forget self-censorship.
[Guest]: If you can't make fun of yourself, if you can't have fun with things around you, question
[Guest]: them all the time, then we're just sliding into a space where you only walk the straight
[Guest]: line.
[Guest]: And what does that bring to anyone anyway?
[Guest]: As long as you have enough people supporting you in taking that step which says, I've broken
[Guest]: no law, but I am going to ask the questions through my author or whoever is writing that
[Guest]: book that need to be asked.
[Guest]: Do it because that's the only reason to be.
[Guest]: I mean, the older you get in the profession, the more you have to ask yourself, why are
[Guest]: you doing what you're doing?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: If you're doing this to be genuinely engaged with what matters around you.
[Guest]: And I do think that since 2014, I have particularly felt much more troubled and much more intent
[Guest]: on trying to do whatever little bit one can to keep the conversation alive about the things
[Guest]: that matter to me.
[Guest]: Then the only route open to me is to publish books that I care about in that space and
[Guest]: to find writers who write about things that matter.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean that if I see a good book, well argued and written well, from another
[Guest]: political point of view, that does not have a place either.
[Guest]: It does.
[Guest]: But I must admit, I bring a different heart and a different commitment to the books that
[Guest]: talk about democracy and the republic and India in ways that I hold dear to myself.
[Guest]: And thankfully, if you can find the right writers and get the right books, then there
[Guest]: are enough readers to sustain that as a saleable proposition.
[Guest]: So it's not bad business either.
[Guest]: Of course, there are this point of view of diversity, for instance, there are people
[Guest]: in a publishing house will have very different political points of view.
[Guest]: And you can't as a publisher say, no, no, no, we will only publish what I believe in.
[Guest]: So obviously, there is always space to publish right, left, center, whatever.
[Guest]: But that is the sheer beauty of it, right?
[Guest]: As many readers and as many points of view as there are, the more you can put out, because
[Guest]: the most important thing is also, I think, to understand what the other side is saying
[Guest]: and to engage with it intelligently, rather than to dismiss it as something not to be
[Guest]: talked about at all.
[Guest]: That is a grave mistake.
[Guest]: And which is why I want to see more publishing, for instance, on the right by people who believe
[Guest]: in that worldview, because I want to understand what it is before I can knock it down.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that also enriches the discourse, if you can work with a writer whose views
[Amit Varma]: you may not agree with, but you help him get the best version of his views.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what kind of strikes me here is and I'm just looking at sort of journalism
[Amit Varma]: as an analog.
[Amit Varma]: And what one sees in journalism is that more and more you see the really big sort of entities
[Amit Varma]: like the major mainstream newspapers and so on, play it safe, self censor when they feel
[Amit Varma]: like and one understands why that is because they have business imperatives that go beyond
[Amit Varma]: the newspaper business.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they are in all other kinds of businesses, a government can put pressure, threaten raids,
[Amit Varma]: ask for their tax returns again, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: There are a million ways of putting pressure.
[Amit Varma]: And what you see is a bunch of young publications, which are bravely fighting the good fight
[Amit Varma]: people like scroll wire, alt news, whatever, we know who they are.
[Amit Varma]: And in publishing, on the other hand, the standard you have taken is that no, it is
[Amit Varma]: a big people who should fight because we have the legal resources to actually fight this
[Amit Varma]: fight.
[Amit Varma]: And we are doing the right thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me as a worry that, you know, it's great that you should say that, but you're
[Amit Varma]: an individual and a lot of this is coming from personal conviction.
[Amit Varma]: But is this kind of approach something that can survive in the system beyond individuals
[Guest]: like yourself?
[Guest]: I think it can.
[Guest]: And I think it will, because, for one thing, the pressures are not the same, especially
[Guest]: within English language publishing, right?
[Guest]: I don't think this could be said of publishing in Hindi, for instance, or in other languages,
[Guest]: where the voter is very close to that language and to that culture.
[Guest]: Whereas I think the establishment does not care as much about the English language publishing
[Guest]: space, because they also know that in some ways, it is still an echo chamber.
[Guest]: And it is not going to drastically change the way people think much as we'd like to
[Guest]: think that we can achieve that.
[Guest]: I think we are often talking to converts who are already thinking along the way we lines
[Guest]: we are.
[Guest]: So it's a kind of revalidation.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's like talking to yourself over and over again, which is also important to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: But the day it becomes a matter of urgency that this conversation of a book with a reader
[Guest]: in the English language will actually change a vote or turn a vote or make constituencies
[Guest]: of those people, I think that is the day we will face genuine pressure.
[Guest]: At the moment, that pressure is not so big that we can't resist.
[Guest]: It just takes a strong legal team, it takes some public support, and you can get past
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But when it comes to religion, then obviously there are problems because sometimes it's
[Guest]: simply a matter of you're saying, even if I'm within a publishing house that can protect
[Guest]: me, there are other people in that publishing house.
[Guest]: And stones can be thrown at anyone and somebody can be taken off to jail as representative
[Guest]: of that publishing house who had nothing to do with the choice I make as an individual.
[Guest]: And that is an unfair passing on of responsibility.
[Guest]: So there will be times when you have to take the call and say, well, this is done, but
[Guest]: maybe we just can't live up to it beyond a point.
[Guest]: And so we have to succumb to the reality of it.
[Guest]: Thankfully, in my own experience, that hasn't come to be, there has been no such thing,
[Guest]: but I see it around me.
[Guest]: I see publishers and editors who've had to go through that experience, and it's very
[Guest]: difficult.
[Guest]: So far from sitting in judgment on anyone who has to either self-censor or pull back
[Guest]: books or whatever, I'd say the problem here is that we don't have enough support when
[Guest]: these things happen.
[Guest]: People don't care enough to step out and fight that battle.
[Guest]: I mean, when Perumal Murugan said, I'm dead as a writer, it took a court to say, do what
[Guest]: you do best, which is right, and go back and do it.
[Guest]: And he did it, right, and he's now one of our best known writers and the best writers
[Guest]: we have.
[Guest]: But there was support for him.
[Guest]: There were people who went out and said, this is an important battle to fight.
[Guest]: His publisher, Kannan Sundaram Kalachuvuda, stood by him, and they went to court with
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: If it takes a few individuals to back publishing in a certain way, it also takes only a few
[Guest]: individuals to fight the battles that matter, as long as they are supported enough by the
[Guest]: larger community.
[Guest]: And I think if we don't see the necessity for that in this time, we're never going to
[Guest]: see it again, because we're not going to have the freedom to see it again.
[Guest]: So we'd better stand together.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm just thinking aloud.
[Amit Varma]: But it strikes me that there might be a good sort of self selection at play here, in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that the people who would have been likeliest to come into a thankless profession
[Amit Varma]: like publishing in the, you know, in the 80s and 90s, and who are therefore senior in the
[Amit Varma]: industry now, are people who would have been prolific readers and deeply engaged with critical
[Amit Varma]: thinking and so on, and therefore are likelier to fight back against any kind of oppressive
[Amit Varma]: climate coming from somewhere.
[Guest]: Is there perhaps something to that?
[Guest]: I imagine there is because we did grow up in a time where these things were the things
[Guest]: you fought for, and you continue to fight for them.
[Guest]: But I also think that, in a strange way, the people who are now coming into it are coming
[Guest]: into it at a time when there is an urgent need to think like this and to rethink where
[Guest]: we are.
[Guest]: And therefore, I'm also hopeful that the urgency we did not face, then we came to it gradually,
[Guest]: they will be aware of it from the very beginning, and they will set up their goalposts and set
[Guest]: up their games and boundaries already knowing that these are important turfs to guard and
[Guest]: that these are important turfs to fight for.
[Guest]: And as long as they also have an old guard standing by them, I think they will grow into
[Guest]: people who will protect the ground for us.
[Amit Varma]: That's really heartening.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of move on now from politics to a subject that is less worrying, which is
[Amit Varma]: the nature of reading, you know, people read for different reasons, people might read for
[Amit Varma]: performative reasons, they might buy a book, you know, if something wins a Booker Prize,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people who buy it, buy it because I have to have it, I feel intellectual just
[Amit Varma]: by having it.
[Amit Varma]: People may read for escapist reasons, which are great reasons, which is why I started
[Amit Varma]: reading, for example, people might read to learn more about the world, people, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: it's the best way to learn more about the world, really, and people might read to sort
[Amit Varma]: of enlighten themselves and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Or people might, you know, in the case, you know, as a suspicion was about many Chetan
[Amit Varma]: Bhagatri, does they might read to learn the language better, which is also great.
[Amit Varma]: Looking through the sort of the different kinds of reasons why people read, have those
[Amit Varma]: sort of changed, you know, over the last sort of 25 years that you've been in the business?
[Guest]: There's one clear difference I see in numbers, which probably tell us what people are reading.
[Guest]: And that is this whole new market for the spiritual book, for the book by the gurus,
[Guest]: for the book by the religious or not necessarily religious, but reformist, ashram living teachers
[Guest]: of how to live and how to think and how to make yourself whatever you want to be, etc.
[Guest]: Hundreds of thousands of copies are being sold of those books, and the bestseller charts
[Guest]: are now ruled by them.
[Guest]: Which means people are turning to the DIY in a different way from which in which they
[Guest]: were turning to them earlier, which was like the Dale Geert Karnagie, how to improve how
[Guest]: to you know, be better at your job sort of thing, to some kind of great need to have
[Guest]: systems of peace seeking and meditation and, you know, rejigging your insides and all of
[Guest]: these things that are happening.
[Guest]: And the numbers show that they come from a very Hindu space.
[Guest]: They come from a very mainstream space, if you want to call it that.
[Guest]: And they are obviously backed by systems, by organizations.
[Guest]: So there is a certain way in which they are organic and going to readers, but they're
[Guest]: also institutionalized.
[Guest]: So that is a new world for us.
[Guest]: It's been the last few years that we've seen this market really develop into big numbers.
[Guest]: For the rest of it, the categories haven't surprised us.
[Guest]: I mean, they're still the same old categories.
[Amit Varma]: Like I did an episode with Akshay Mukul a while back on his great book on the Gita Press.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the big revelation in that book was how much of an organized movement
[Amit Varma]: that was about getting that kind of literature out there and getting people to read it and
[Amit Varma]: all that.
[Amit Varma]: Is this in a sense an extension of that?
[Amit Varma]: Or is a lot of it just an organic quest of a lot of people now sort of having the means
[Amit Varma]: and the spare time to be able to actually read books and having those same urges and
[Amit Varma]: English being aspirational and growing?
[Amit Varma]: Where, you know, they're sort of, I mean, I'm assuming many of these would be readers
[Guest]: who don't otherwise read, right?
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: That's why I said that in that way, they are the new category of readers who are like people
[Guest]: discover Chetan Bhagat and how to read in a certain way.
[Guest]: They discovered these and said, oh, I enjoy reading these books.
[Guest]: I enjoy reading them in English as well, because it's not about the language.
[Guest]: It's about what's being said to me.
[Guest]: And I get what they're saying to me.
[Guest]: So I think there are many among those people who have come to them organically in their
[Guest]: own time in life, their own age or whatever it is that drives them to it.
[Guest]: I also think there is an institutionalized way in which that reading is being propagated
[Guest]: and nurtured, which is to do with our own society at the moment, which is to do with
[Guest]: what is seen to be good to read and which prove your allegiance to a certain way of
[Guest]: existence.
[Guest]: And you know that this is only going to get you kudos and brownie points and not there's
[Guest]: no downside to being seen to be reading this stuff.
[Guest]: So I think you do fall in with the system while sometimes also finding that one book
[Guest]: or two that actually makes a difference to your own life.
[Amit Varma]: So are there sort of political and social implications to this in the sense that you're
[Amit Varma]: not just picking up that spiritual book for, you know, your personal peace of mind or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: though that might be a reason in many cases, but also out of a tribal sense of belonging
[Guest]: to a community and a way of thinking and a way of living and that book reaffirms that.
[Guest]: I think it does do that.
[Guest]: And I think there are a lot of people out there who feel a little lost in their own
[Guest]: lives, perhaps lost in not having communities around them, which is why they seek out others
[Guest]: to belong to.
[Guest]: And when they do, then these texts and these readings and remember, I would not underestimate
[Guest]: the WhatsApp universes we occupy now, because there's a lot of little wisdoms and little
[Guest]: videos that do the rounds that somebody said something which made a lot of sense to you.
[Guest]: And then you say, oh, and you go into the bookshop, or you browsing online, and you
[Guest]: suddenly see a whole book by that person.
[Guest]: And you say, I'm sure there's something there for me and you buy it and you may not read
[Guest]: it cover to cover.
[Guest]: But there will be little nuggets, there will be little things in it, which you will apply
[Guest]: to yourself.
[Guest]: So you will then next time buy another one by somebody else, maybe in that same category,
[Guest]: because it gives you something which is a learning which is something that you want
[Guest]: for yourself in this really vital way, which you may not have felt at another time in your
[Amit Varma]: life, but you certainly do now.
[Amit Varma]: And if there's something there that you know, is part of your value system, buying it is
[Amit Varma]: like an affirmation of who you are, in a sense, this is who I am, this is where I kind of
[Amit Varma]: belong.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk a little bit about ebooks, you know, when the Kindle first came about, I
[Amit Varma]: mean, I was just an evangelist, because for me, books were the words that an author writes,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, you know, the rest is packaging.
[Amit Varma]: And I also, you know, being of the age I am do feel nostalgic for the particular packaging
[Amit Varma]: in which we read our books.
[Amit Varma]: But at the end of the day, it's wood pulp, it's paper, it's just packaging and the words
[Amit Varma]: are everything.
[Amit Varma]: And I imagine rather naively that after my generation dies out, all the kids will just
[Amit Varma]: be reading ebooks, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that's not that's clearly not happened.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, physical books are selling more than ever.
[Unknown]: Is this something you foresaw?
[Amit Varma]: Or you know, why do you think this is?
[Guest]: I think that in the beginning, everyone in India also thought we'd follow the path of
[Guest]: the West.
[Guest]: And in the US, for instance, they were looking at something like 50% of the market being
[Guest]: ebooks and 50% physical books.
[Guest]: I think this was around 2011 when ebooks outsold, but then it flipped back.
[Guest]: Then it started to yeah, then it started to climb back.
[Guest]: And while we were pitching ahead, so I remember when you made your five year plans, you'd
[Guest]: say five years from now, you would have like 50% ebooks and 50% physical, etc.
[Guest]: And you thought you were planning technology towards that, etc.
[Guest]: And suddenly, it changed.
[Guest]: And you started to see that 50% going back to 40 to 30 to whatever it is now maybe 25
[Guest]: or 35.
[Guest]: And you realize that that is something that you're not going to reach the 50% before going
[Guest]: back to 25.
[Guest]: You're probably going to climb gradually up to like 25 20% at the most, and stay there
[Guest]: is the feeling we have now.
[Guest]: And there is in India for sure, every publisher is still banking on selling physical books.
[Guest]: There's a little bit of an exception once in a while.
[Guest]: I mean, there are certain kinds of categories.
[Guest]: For instance, I remember when Abdul Kalam's books first came out, and ebooks were starting
[Guest]: to be popular.
[Guest]: There were a lot of people who wanted to read his books outside of India as well.
[Guest]: And for them, the ebook was easier.
[Guest]: So you had some books and I remember this Marathi publisher telling me that the Marathi
[Guest]: reading diaspora were buying a lot of ebooks of the big novels in Marathi.
[Guest]: So there were pockets where you saw that this could be the future.
[Guest]: But each time then the numbers came down to okay, 5%, 7%, 10%, whatever.
[Guest]: And it never really became a challenge to the physical book.
[Guest]: And I think that's where we are at now.
[Guest]: We're not even anticipating a future at the moment where the ebook will take over.
[Amit Varma]: And give me a sense, I mean, perhaps I should have asked this question right at the start.
[Amit Varma]: But give me a sense of how readership has evolved in India through the years that you've
[Amit Varma]: been part of the publishing industry just in terms of numbers.
[Amit Varma]: Like do more people read now?
[Amit Varma]: Do more books get sold?
[Amit Varma]: Have there been booms?
[Amit Varma]: Have there been sort of crisis?
[Guest]: I think books every year, we do sell more books than the previous year.
[Guest]: There's no doubt about that.
[Guest]: The children's market has been growing steadily.
[Guest]: There are years, I mean, several years where retailers have said they have grown by like
[Guest]: 25% over the previous year.
[Guest]: So that is obviously you can see why.
[Guest]: I mean, there are more children coming in through the language systems into English.
[Amit Varma]: That's our only demographic dividend.
[Guest]: Yes, there's no doubt about that.
[Guest]: So that is definitely a growth.
[Guest]: Educational publishing, school books grow by sometimes 100%, 50%, 100% depending on
[Guest]: the company you're in.
[Guest]: That is also explicable.
[Guest]: You know how many more students are joining schools?
[Guest]: How many more schools are starting up, etc.
[Guest]: But in the choice space where you are actually choosing to read a book because you want to
[Guest]: spend time with it and not for any compulsion, I think even that space has been growing.
[Guest]: As I said, sometimes in this category, sometimes in that.
[Guest]: But if you look at the overall picture, the bestseller has gone from being 5,000 or 10,000
[Guest]: to 100,000 or 50,000 copies, which in itself is a marker of how much more we expect our
[Guest]: better books to do.
[Guest]: So while your average book, as I said, may still be 2,000 to 3,000 copies, when you say
[Guest]: something is doing well, you do not mean 3,000 or 4,000 anymore.
[Guest]: When you say a book is doing well, you're actually saying where at least 10,000 copies
[Guest]: have sold and not at a really cheap price.
[Guest]: Maybe I'm not when you're talking about a book that is a mass market novel, for instance,
[Guest]: which is like a 200 rupee book or a 250 book, then you're not even going to look at 10,000
[Guest]: copies as a bestseller.
[Guest]: Then you're only going to talk about it as a bestseller when it's reached like a 50,000
[Guest]: or something.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So in that sense, yes, everything is growing.
[Guest]: Everything is looking better year after year.
[Guest]: Most publishing houses are able to grow to some percentage or the other every year.
[Guest]: It's not static like it is in several Western publishing houses.
[Guest]: The question is only, are we growing in the right segments according to ourselves?
[Guest]: Are we at the right books or the books that we think deserve to be selling more?
[Guest]: Are they selling more?
[Guest]: Are we getting the best writers the space that they should get as opposed to books that
[Guest]: are just being churned out and read and republished or whatever without enough care to them?
[Guest]: So those are questions that I think will always exist.
[Guest]: I mean, there'll always be filters that some want to apply and there'll always be gateways
[Guest]: that other people want to break open.
[Guest]: But that I think all of it coexists.
[Guest]: There will be some in this segment and some in that and together they will grow.
[Guest]: But you can't knock out one for another.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of filters, how has discovery changed over these last 25 years?
[Amit Varma]: Like back in the day, you know, your discovery, I imagine, would be one of three ways you
[Amit Varma]: read about a book in the newspaper, maybe through a news review and a book review, and
[Amit Varma]: there weren't many of those.
[Amit Varma]: You'd hear about it by word of mouth, or you'd see it in the display of your local bookstore.
[Amit Varma]: Well, now I think that ways of discovery must surely be so much more disparate.
[Amit Varma]: And especially in Bombay, I hardly get to go to a bookstore anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And when I do, I'm usually not buying very much.
[Unknown]: I'm ashamed to say I'm just looking in my Amazon and, you know, making lists of books
[Amit Varma]: that I want to acquire in whatever form.
[Amit Varma]: How has the discovery changed?
[Amit Varma]: And following on from that, how does a publisher then cater their marketing to how people discover
[Amit Varma]: books?
[Amit Varma]: Is social media really a big part of that?
[Amit Varma]: Do you then find yourself chasing influencers and getting them to write books, simply because
[Amit Varma]: they are influencers, which I imagine would be a wrong reason, but from one point of view
[Guest]: might make sense.
[Guest]: I think it has changed.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, there's the usual old ways, friends recommended, universities recommended,
[Guest]: or you find it in a bookstore, etc.
[Guest]: But a lot of people now are finding that they're browsing online and coming up with a book
[Guest]: that they then chase down to see the reviews.
[Guest]: And Amazon five star reviews by 300 people will drive you to buy a book in a way that
[Guest]: I think you would have not thought possible earlier.
[Guest]: Because there was still that sense that the reviewer who's a professional reviewer, who
[Guest]: writes for it in a sanctified space like a newspaper, has a view that is more to be respected
[Guest]: and to be followed up on by purchase of the book.
[Guest]: But now people are saying, I actually I don't care who said it.
[Guest]: I trust these hundred people on because those are like they have no stake in anything.
[Guest]: I believe that they're speaking what they want to say and what they actually believe.
[Guest]: And I'm willing to go by that.
[Guest]: So a lot of people will buy a book after reading online reviews, which is a whole new thing,
[Guest]: which means that your marketing, as you said, has to be geared towards online discovery.
[Guest]: It can't just be POS in stores, can't be visibility in bookshops alone.
[Guest]: It really needs people to look at a post by someone and follow the link to buy the book
[Guest]: right then and there because it's a possible.
[Guest]: And when an influencer like say Ashashi Tharoor says, I don't remember the last time he said
[Guest]: this, but when he does say, I loved this book and puts up something by the author, I am
[Guest]: absolutely sure that a lot of people would follow that and go buy the book immediately.
[Guest]: We see spikes when an influencer who's like a major influencer says something positive
[Guest]: about a book on Insta or Twitter.
[Guest]: We see that people go online and buy the book.
[Guest]: We don't see that spike so much in the stores, but we see it as an almost instinctive response
[Guest]: that oh, then I want it and I am able to buy it immediately online.
[Guest]: So I will do that.
[Guest]: So we do invest a lot more time and money and effort in getting our social media right,
[Guest]: in following the right people on Insta and Twitter and Facebook to get that.
[Guest]: A lot more Facebook live chats happen when you're launching a book.
[Guest]: Twitter Blueroom is used to have conversations with writers.
[Guest]: So there is that sense that the real committed reader who goes to a bookshop, who actually
[Guest]: makes the effort to go to a bookshop, will discover the books that they need to discover.
[Guest]: We don't need to worry about them so much, but it's the others that you want to get,
[Guest]: the ones who are not committed, who could choose to read or not read and would be completely
[Guest]: almost licentious in their, you know, they can read something from the US or the UK or
[Guest]: India or Europe or whatever.
[Guest]: How do you get them to focus on the book that you want them to read?
[Amit Varma]: Who will read something and love it and say, wow, I didn't know I needed this.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And once they say that to five more people, and once five more people read it and put
[Guest]: up great reviews, and then five other people protest that and there's a little bit of an
[Guest]: environment of, you know, we are reading and actually engaging with this book, then it
[Guest]: will take off differently.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I think back on how I used to sort of read books once upon a time that let's
[Amit Varma]: say I'm taking a local train from Andheri to Churchgate 20 years ago, and I'll carry
[Amit Varma]: a book with me.
[Amit Varma]: And today, if I'm on a commute that long, I'll be looking at my smartphone and I'll
[Amit Varma]: be on Twitter, or I'll be listening to a podcast, perhaps, which is not necessarily a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: And doing things like that, or when I go to bed at night, you know, I'll have a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of bedside reading going on. And now most people are essentially turning off their blue
[Amit Varma]: screens and hopefully, you know, in some cases reading the Kindle on their phone, but that's
[Amit Varma]: less and less likely.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll sort of I've taken up a lot of your time, I'll end this episode by asking you
[Amit Varma]: a question I ask all my guests about whatever subject we're talking about, that looking
[Amit Varma]: at publishing specifically and reading in general over the next 10 to 20 years, what
[Amit Varma]: gives you hope and what gives you despair?
[Guest]: What gives me despair is the people I see around me, including my children, who do not
[Guest]: think books are the mainstay of their lives and would think books are perfectly dispensable.
[Guest]: And that what they get from YouTube, or from whatever else they're engaged on in on the
[Guest]: smart screen is absolutely good enough for them.
[Guest]: I don't know how long those things last, whether they are phases, and maybe they will change.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they secretly read every day. This is just a posturing for you. They're rebelling
[Amit Varma]: against their mother.
[Guest]: Possible. But I mean, they're just reflective of a whole community of people out there who
[Guest]: I think read less than I would like them to. But you know, the thing is, when I was growing
[Guest]: up, or you were growing up possibly, or other people our age were, I don't think our mothers
[Guest]: or fathers read stories to us. I think they told us stories when we went to bed. But somewhere
[Guest]: along the way, we decided that reading a book to a child was like the best way to educate
[Guest]: them and bring them up to date with, you know, life and times of the world and their characters.
[Guest]: And then when we saw that they were reading less, we decided that, oh, my God, we have
[Guest]: completely transformed and the society is no longer reading. But when were they reading?
[Guest]: We tend to think everything in our life is the standard by which everything else has
[Guest]: to be measured. And that's partly why we think reading is so important. But if you look at
[Guest]: it another way, as long as the stories continue, as long as people will use narrative in their
[Guest]: own ways, whatever those ways are, and they will continue to get people to think through
[Guest]: those stories, bedtime or in school, or just the way we talk to each other, I think that's
[Guest]: good enough. I think its form is only so important. Whether it's a printed book, whether it's
[Guest]: on screen, whether it's written or told or watched. I think the story is the heart of
[Guest]: the matter. And that's what gives me hope that as long as the story is required for
[Guest]: us and as long as we love the story, we will continue to find new ways and more interesting
[Guest]: ways to tell that story. And a book is one part of that. And I think we should stop prioritizing
[Guest]: form over content. And as we change, as lives change around us, people will find different
[Guest]: ways of packaging the story. But I don't think the story is going away. And that's what gives
[Guest]: me hope.
[Amit Varma]: These are very wise words. I agree with you entirely. And I would add to that by saying
[Amit Varma]: that it's okay if you don't read as much as your parents think you should as long as you
[Amit Varma]: spend that time listening to podcasts. Kartika, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: I really enjoyed chatting with you.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. I loved that too.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Kartika on Twitter at KartikaVK.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma. You can browse past episodes of the scene
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen and seen unseen at IN thinkpragati.com and ivmpodcast.com. The scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: is supported by the Takshashila Institution. Postgraduate courses in public policy begin
[Amit Varma]: in January. The last couple of years I've actually taught a module on how to write op-eds.
[Amit Varma]: So let that be reason enough to sign up. You can get more information at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, I'm Satyajit.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, I'm Racheta.
[Unknown]: We are from the Open Library Project and we host a podcast called Paperback.
[Unknown]: Paperback is a podcast where we engage with stalwarts and experts from various industries,
[Unknown]: presenting non-fiction titles that contributed to their journey in a big way.
[Unknown]: We've had guests like Anjali Raina, Dr. Marcus Rani, Dr. Swati Lodha, Ambi Parmeswaran, Apoorva
[Unknown]: Damani and many more on our show Paperback. Find new episodes every Wednesday on IVM Podcast
[Unknown]: app, website or wherever you listen to podcasts.
[Unknown]: Hi I'm Sariya Natarajan.
[Unknown]: And I'm Alok Prasanna Kumar.
[Unknown]: And we are the hosts of the Gana Tantra Podcast.
[Unknown]: On this podcast, we speak to academics, social scientists, journalists and activists to find
[Unknown]: out what's actually going on in Indian politics.
[Unknown]: On this podcast, we stay away from personality politics, intrigue and gossip, and instead
[Unknown]: focus on the data, research and analysis that drives all this.
[Unknown]: So tune in to the Gana Tantra Podcast, where new episodes are out every Wednesday on the
[Unknown]: IVM Podcast app, website or wherever you listen to your podcasts.